PUBLIC

IDB FOR CITIES & REGIONS
PROPOSAL FOR A SUB-SOVEREIGN FINANCE PROGRAM AT
THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

June 2025

This document was prepared under the supervision of Juan Pablo Bonilla (CSD) and
Emilio Pineda (IFD) by a Working Group comprising Tatiana Gallego Lizon and Maria
Camila Uribe (CSD); Axel Radics and Andrés Munoz (IFD); Juan Manuel Puerta and
Gabriel Filc (SPD); Guillermo Eschoyez and Esteban de Dobrzynski (LEG); Gustavo de
Rosa, Ramón Ruiz, Ian MacDonald, Alexandre Borges, Yasser Rezvi, Catalina Ventrell
and Maximo Silberberg (FIN); Søren Elbech, Ximena Giraud, Alfredo Rodriguez,
Emmanuel Baez, Adriana Avalos and Daniela Serrano (RMG); Maria Julia Bocco and
Mauro Alem (INE); Juanita Riaño and Raquel Mayer (OII); Santiago Schneider and
Karina Diaz Briones (FMP); Chiaki Yamamoto (EVP); Serge Troch (ESG); Santiago
Monroy (GPO); Manuel Pacheco (VPC); Claudia Suaznabar, Mauricio Lopez Prada and
Wilkferg Vanegas (VPS); Elizabeth Robberechts (INO).
Under the Access to Information Policy, this document is subject to Public Disclosure.
*

This document contains confidential information in Section 5.B, Annex 6, and Annex 1, which is subject to non-disclosure according to the
IDB's Access to Information Policy. Section 5.B and Annex 6 will not be disclosed under exception 4.1 h, "Certain Financial Information."
Additionally, Annex 1 will not be disclosed under exception 4.1 e, "Information Provided in Confidence." Once authorization is obtained from
the other multilateral development agencies, Annex 1 will be disclosed.

CONTENTS

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................... 1

II.

BACKGROUND ................................................................................................................. 1

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

A.

Towards Efficient Territorial Development ........................................................... 1

B.

A Differentiated Approach to SNG Development ........................................... 2

C.

MDB Experience Lending to SNGs without a
Sovereign Guarantee .......................................................................................................... 6

JUSTIFICATION............................................................................................................... 10
A.

Investment Needs ................................................................................................................ 11

B.

Fiscal Advances ..................................................................................................................... 13

C.

Improving Access to Private Sector Financing ............................................... 14

D.

Changing Financial Architecture .............................................................................. 15

PROPOSAL ..................................................................................................................... 15
A.

Objective of the SFP........................................................................................................... 15

B.

The SFP as a Pilot ................................................................................................................. 19

C.

Operational Considerations .......................................................................................... 21

D.

Pricing Principles and Financial Conditions .................................................... 25

E.

Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation................................................................. 26

F.

Supporting Impact + under a Synergistic Approach ................................. 28

G.

Organizational Arrangements ................................................................................... 29

RISK MANAGEMENT ..................................................................................................... 30
A.

Moral Hazard .......................................................................................................................... 30

B.

*........................................................................................................................................................ 30

C.

Integrity and Fiduciary Risk .......................................................................................... 31

RECOMMENDATION ...................................................................................................... 31

- ii -

ANNEXES
Annex I

*

Annex II

Fiscal and Financial Condition of lac SNGs – A Preliminary
Creditworthiness Analysis

Annex III

Requirements for the Contracting of External Loans by Subnational
Governments in LAC – A Preliminary Analysis

Annex IV

Evaluation Framework

Annex V

Preliminary Budgetary Requirements for the Pilot Period

Annex VI

*

APPENDICES
Appendix I

Proposed Resolution

- iii -

ABBREVIATIONS
AFD

French Cooperation Agency

CAF

The Development Bank of Latin America and The Caribbean

CAP

Capital Adequacy Policy

CCR

Capital Coverage Ratio

ESG

Environmental, Social, and Governance Safeguards

EBRD

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

EIB

European Investment Bank

FFF

Flexible Financing Facility

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

IDB

Inter-American Development Bank

IFC

International Finance Corporation

IFI

International Financial Institution

LAC

Latin America and The Caribbean

NSG

Non-Sovereign Guaranteed

OVE

Office of Evaluation and Oversight

OII

Office of Institutional Integrity

OECD

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development

PPP

Public-Private Partnership

RMG

Risk Management Group

SG

Sovereign Guaranteed

SOE

State -Owned Enterprise

SNG

Subnational Government

SFP

Sub-Sovereign Finance Program

SDG

Sustainable Development Goals

TC

Technical Cooperation

Executive Summary
Page 1 of 3

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1

The purpose of this document is to submit to the Board of Executive
Directors (‘the Board’) for its consideration and approval the
establishment of a “Sub-Sovereign Finance Program (SFP)”, on a 5-year
pilot basis, to finance investment loans and guarantees to sub-sovereign
eligible entities 1 in borrowing member countries of the Inter-American
Development Bank (the “IDB”), without the guarantee and/or counterguarantee of the sovereign. The general objective of the SFP is to assist
eligible subnational governments (SNGs) promote sustainable regions 2
and local development by improving access to market financing. The
specific objectives of the SFP are (i) to strengthen SNGs’ fiscal and
financial management, (ii) to strengthen SNGs’ capacities to structure
and implement project pipelines, and (iii) to improve service delivery and
infrastructure at the subnational level.

1.2

The SFP responds to a differentiated approach to SNG development
needs that seeks to promote gradual technical and financial readiness,
and which recognizes that there is a segment of cities and regions
requiring separate strategic financing modalities allowing them to
transition to market borrowing. SNG eligibility, to be subject to financing
under the SFP, will be determined, among other requirements 3 by:
(i) their ability to contract and obtain external financing from the IDB
without the guarantee of the sovereign; and (ii) their credit strength,
financial viability, legal capacity, and good governance. Project eligibility
under the SFP will respond to 3 mutually reinforcing elements: (i) high
developmental impact; (ii) preventing private sector financing crowding
out, and (iii) improved SNG efficiency and effectiveness.

1.3

SFP in its 5-year pilot will consist of the following two subprograms: (i) a
sub-sovereign investment finance subprogram for up to US$1 billion to
be funded by the Bank’s Ordinary Capital resources (Subprogram 1); and
(ii) a technical cooperation (TC) sub-sovereign readiness subprogram
(Subprogram 2) to be financed with the Bank’s Ordinary Capital
resources annually allocated under the Strategic Development Program,

1

For purposes of this proposal the terms Sub-National Entities (SNEs), Sub-Sovereign Entities
(SSEs), and Sub-National Governments (SNGs) shall be used interchangeably and understood
as referring to sub-sovereign governments, including states, provinces, departments, and
municipalities, depending on a country's political subdivision.

2

Regions in this paper refers to second-tier government jurisdictions in different countries, and
may include departments, provinces, regions, states and/or any other intermediate levels of
government.

3

Legal, operational, financial, and institutional requirements as set forth in the Bank’s policies
shall also apply for determining the SNGs eligibility.

Executive Summary
Page 2 of 3

and/or donor or partner funds under Bank administration. Resources
under Subprogram 2 will be used to provide: (i) non-reimbursable
Technical Cooperation (TC) resources for reforms, capacity building and
project prefeasibility; and (ii) contingent recovery TC for project design.
1.4

Consistent with the IDB Group Institutional Strategy: Transforming for
Scale and Impact (CA-631), “Impact+”, the SFP will support its 3 core
objectives of bolstering sustainable growth, addressing climate change,
and reducing poverty and inequality. SFP will support improved access
to services and infrastructure provided by SNGs to their population, and
institutional strengthening. The IDB – through its deep understanding of
SNGs and its broad expertise in fiscal and financial management, urban
planning and development, services and infrastructure, public
management and non-sovereign finance areas, among others – is
uniquely positioned to help SNGs transition from sovereign guaranteed
borrowing to market borrowing and to improve their access to finance.
It will do so by guiding SNGs throughout (i) the development and
implementation of operations, (ii) building capacities, and (iii) the
implementation of local and regional government reforms that will
ensure outcome delivery and debt repayment. SFP is consistent with
IDB’s Subnational Governments’ Sector Framework.

1.5

Experience from several Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) and
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) implementing sub-sovereign
lending has been positive, with most operations being on track. This type
of financing has promoted ownership among SNGs, placing
responsibility on cities and regions to strategically align investments
with long term plans, focusing on achieving results, improving
creditworthiness and public management systems, and undertaking
critical sectoral and commercial reforms. In all cases, and at different
scales, this has also developed an important niche of work for several IFIs.
The SFP also provides an opportunity for testing risk sharing structures
with IFI and commercial partners.

1.6

The design, preparation, processing, and implementation of individual
operations will be, among other aspects, guided by the terms and
conditions set forth in Chapter IV of this document as well as in the
operating guidelines to be developed and approved by Management, as
may be amended from time to time. Once approved, Management will
submit the operating guidelines for information to the Board. The Office
of Evaluation (OVE) will conduct an evaluation of the SFP as a lending
instrument after the fifth year of implementation and present it to the
Board. The evaluation will inform subsequent actions associated with the
SFP.

Executive Summary
Page 3 of 3

1.7

Mitigation measures for risks that may arise from the use of this
instrument are also addressed in Chapter V. The risk of moral hazard will
be mitigated through deliberate selection of creditworthy borrowers,
strict adherence to fiscal responsibility frameworks, fiscal strengthening
of pilot SNGs, and IDB’s regular monitoring of financial indicators. Credit
risk to IDB will be managed through a new credit risk management
framework, that includes credit risk assessment of individual operations,
exposure limits and pricing provisions. Similarly, any potential integrity
or fiduciary risks will be managed through SNG strengthening of
governance systems and IDB’s quality assurance and review processes.

1.8

In addition to this Executive Summary, the document includes a
background section (Chapter II); a justification section (Chapter III); the
proposal (Chapter IV); risk management considerations (Chapter V), and
a final Chapter containing the corresponding recommendations for
approval by the Board (Chapter VI).

II.

BACKGROUND

A.

Towards Efficient Territorial Development

2.1

Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) SNGs’ landscape is complex
and diverse. LAC is home to over 17,000 SNGs, 98 percent of these are
municipalities. They comprise regions with both large and sparse
populations; urban and rural typologies; and vastly different
contributions to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP),
employment growth and productivity. For example, in Brazil, the
population densities of states like Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo – which
are largely urban, industrial and service-based economic power houses
jointly contributing over 42 percent of the country’s GDP – are 367 and
166 people per sq. km respectively, while those in the states of Amazonas
and Roraima – mostly rural and agricultural – are just above 2.5 people
per sq. km.

2.2

The case of cities is also compelling. LAC urbanized more rapidly than
any other region in the world. The share of urban population nearly
doubled from 49 percent in 1960 to 80 percent in 2015, but these overall
figures mask notable differences in the process and degree of
urbanization. While LAC has a high level of urban primacy – with the
world’s largest percentage of its population living in megacities and
nearly 15 percent of the total population in its 6 largest cities (UN DESA
2015) 4 – 90 percent of the municipalities have less than 50,000
inhabitants and more than 30 percent have less than 5,000 inhabitants.
There are also vast differences when it comes to economic and social
indicators. Overall, cities drive LAC’s economic growth but this, in turn, is
highly concentrated, with 60% of the GDP generated by the 200 largest
cities and 30 percent by 10 megacities alone (McKinsey, 2011). 5 While
income inequality in the region, as measured by the Gini coefficient,
remains generally high at 0.499 (World Bank, 2024), 6 it is also higher in
cities, with an average 0.29 percent increase in income inequality
associated with a 10 percent increase in city population (World Bank,
2018) 7. As in other parts of the emerging world, LAC’s skilled force 8 and
technology are disproportionally concentrated in large cities.

4

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (UN DESA).
2015. Database on Household Size and Composition. New York.

5

MGI. 2011. Building globally competitive cities: The key to Latin American growth.

6

World Bank. 2024. Regional Poverty. Washington DC.

7

World Bank. 2018. Raising the Bar for Productive Cities in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Washington DC

8

A recent study associated a 10% increase in city’s population with a 2.9% increase in the share of
the city’s population that is skilled (World Bank, 2018).

-22.3

The performance of SNGs varies across geographies. The performance
of SNGs is a function of the responsibilities vested in them (e.g. service
delivery, amenities and public space, social welfare, public order, etc.),
the quality of civil service systems, 9 and administrative capabilities.
While, on average, low institutional capacity, limited transparency, and
weak management characterize many SNGs across the region, several
regional and local governments in LAC perform at par with global
referents, applying sound key governance principles, public financial
management (including planning, budget management, public
investment, and debt management capacities), public procurement and
recruitment practices (OECD/IDB. 2024). 10,11

B.

A Differentiated Approach to SNG Development

2.4

The IDB has been supporting the development of municipal and
regional governments through financing of sovereign-guaranteed
operations. Around 28 percent of IDB’s active portfolio currently
supports SNGs. This is achieved primarily through sovereign guaranteed
investment loans and grants to: (i) national programs or projects that
support cities, with proceeds mostly transferred as a grant; (ii) financial
intermediaries, such as (a) national or state/provincial-level development
institutions, established to simultaneously lend and strengthen
capacities; and (b) national/regional development banks, which on-lend
to SNGs at affordable rates; and (iii) subnational entities (cities, regions). 12
Despite the prevalence of regular investment loans, there are also
instances of policy-based lending, results-based lending, conditional
credit lines for investment projects and other programmatic
instruments that can help build subnational capacities over the medium
term, with complementary technical cooperation for institutional and
financial strengthening. In addition, IDB Invest finances public-private
partnerships (PPPs), primarily concessions associated with urban
services, and municipal companies.

9

M. Grindle. 2010. Constructing, Deconstructing, and Reconstructing Career Civil Service Systems
in Latin America. Harvard.

10

OECD. 2024. Government at a Glance: Latin America and the Caribbean 2024. Paris.

11

IDB. 2019. The Model Government Ecosystem in the City of Buenos Aires. Washington DC.

12

Direct lending to cities and SNGs is over 20% of IDB’s active portfolio (mainly in Brazil and
Argentina, with fewer operations in Colombia, Ecuador, and Uruguay), while a further 8%
supports SNGs through national programs.

-3Figure 1: Total sovereign lending approvals to SNGs

Source: Project Team Analysis of IDB’s Portfolio

2.5

In the current public sector portfolio, infrastructure sectors (water and
transport), modernization of the state and urban development are
responsible for the largest share of lending, jointly amounting to
approximately 66% of the total value.
Figure 2: Percentage direct lending to SNGs
(with Sovereign Guarantee) by sector

Source: Project Team Analysis of IDB’s Portfolio

-42.6

Lessons from two major IDB urban initiatives, the Emerging and
Sustainable Cities Initiative (ESCI) 13 and PROCIDADES, 14 can provide
useful insights. OVE’s mid-term thematic evaluation 15 of ESCI concluded
that (i) such programs provided cities with increased access to
knowledge and best practices, and (ii) the initiative was found most
successful in the presence of strong political decentralization,
subnational fiscal capacity, planning capabilities, support from
development partners, and demand from intermediate cities. A study
conducted by OVE 16 on PROCIDADES concluded that municipalities that
benefitted most from the program were those that had an initial
minimum level of institutional capacity, which allowed them to handle
the project and further strengthen their ability to work on urban
development. The evaluation suggested (i) forming long-term
partnerships with them and linking loan amounts to their levels of
capacity; (ii) when pursuing innovative approaches with subnational
governments, start small and put strong emphasis on properly assessing
costs, benefits, and potential risks; (iii) allocating resources for
institutional strengthening for municipalities with lower institutional
capacity; and (iv) creating mechanisms for project sustainability. 17

2.7

Different conditions require different solutions to promote gradual
technical and financial readiness. The diverse nature of SNGs in LAC –
size, vulnerability, technical and financial capabilities, capacity to take
and manage debt, etc. – calls for the development of a differentiated
operational approach that responds to country- and local-context and
specific SNG needs and capacities. Figure 3 recognizes the potential for
gradual growth and suggests appropriate financing modalities which
progressively encourage the transfer from grants to borrowing, from
concessional to commercial terms and, ultimately, from public to private
sector financing. To achieve this, IDB needs to expand its instrument
offering to include sub-sovereign finance (a form of finance to
subnational entities without the guarantee of the sovereign), as an
instrument for SNGs capable to take and manage debt seeking to
finance projects whose repayment can be funded from the revenue that

13

ESCI was a non-reimbursable technical assistance program for midsize cities launched in 2012
which relied on a three-pronged multidisciplinary methodology that combined indicators and
diagnostics of urban expansion, climate and municipal fiscal management, leading to the
prioritization of investments which were consolidated into an action plan.

14

PROCIDADES was a facility for financing integrated urban interventions by lending directly to
Brazilian municipalities. It was adopted in 2006 to promote integrated urban development
while reaching a large pool of medium-sized cities.

15

IDB. 2016. Evaluation of the IDB’ s Emerging and Sustainable Cities Initiative. Office of Evaluation
and Oversight. Washington DC.

16

IDB. 2015. Evaluation of PROCIDADES. Office of Evaluation and Oversight. Washington DC.

17

IDB's Cities Network and IDB's Fiscal Decentralization Network have played a critical role in
building capacities, providing opportunities for exchange, and generating knowledge.

-5will be generated from the project, from the revenue account of the SNG,
or a mix of these.
Figure 3: Operational Framework for SNGs with
Different Levels of Technical and Financial Readiness

Source: Project Team Analysis

2.8

Sub-sovereign lending is complementary to sovereign and private
sector lending. It acknowledges the need for central governments to
divest greater responsibilities for public services on SNGs, while
accepting that these entities may not yet be sufficiently appealing to
private sector investors. This approach aims to strengthen frameworks
and systems in SNGs, make them increasingly creditworthy and
enhance their capacity to attract financing from private sources. IDB’s
long-standing relation with SNGs and its mandate to build capacities is
instrumental in this transition.

2.9

Beyond the sovereign guarantee: sub-sovereign finance can bring
benefits to both SNGs and national governments. Sub-sovereign
finance seeks to improve fiscal autonomy of SNGs, ensuring they have
the resources and mechanisms to repay their debts without relying on
bailouts from the national government. This enhanced fiscal autonomy
is an important component of a subnational development strategy,
since it entails improving SNG capacity to mobilize own resources for
development projects; reduces negative incentives in SNG management
related to bailouts; and mitigates a fiscal risk for the central government.
In addition, sub-sovereign finance can also help enhance SNGs’
capacities to prepare projects through improved structuring, including
risk analysis and risk sharing, identify additional revenue flows, and
adopt commercial lending terms and conditions.

-62.10

Sub-sovereign finance is also consistent with the recently approved
Subnational Governments Sector Framework. 18 Sub-sovereign finance
supports, among others, efforts to: (i) improve intergovernmental
arrangements, including subnational fiscal responsibility frameworks
and fiscal monitoring mechanisms, oriented to enhance the
creditworthiness and autonomy of SNGs; (ii) encourage greater
efficiency and quality in expenditure and service delivery by SNGs;
(iii) increase the mobilization of own-source revenue and responsible
access to finance on the part of SNGs, (iv) enhance fiscal transparency of
SNGs; and (v) improve the contribution of SNGs to managing climate
change.

2.11

IDB, through Impact+, is uniquely positioned to help SNGs transition
to/improve sub-sovereign borrowing. As highlighted in the IDB Group
Institutional Strategy, financial instruments are critical to enhance the
scale and impact of the IDB Group interventions, including through
mechanisms to support subnational governments and State-Owned
Enterprises (SOEs), always with the principle of avoiding the crowding
out of private sector investments. 19 IDB’s well-established relationship
with subnational clients and the Group’s broad expertise (in sectors such
as urban planning and development, fiscal and public management,
capital market development, infrastructure and PPPs) will be pivotal not
only to engage in necessary pre-transaction reforms and capacity
building programs, 20 but also to support project implementation and
project post-completion phases.

C.

MDB Experience Lending to SNGs without a Sovereign Guarantee

2.12

Several multilateral and bilateral agencies support sub-national
development finance offering loans and credit enhancements
directly to sub-national entities. This includes IFIs such as the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European
Investment Bank (EIB), the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA), and the International Finance Corporation (IFC), through its
Subnational Finance Program; as well as bilateral agencies like the
French Cooperation Agency (AFD), through direct subnational lending,
or the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency or the
US Trade and Development Agency, through the issuance of guarantees.
Other IFIs, like the Asian Development Bank, have a non-sovereign
public sector instrument, and are considering expanding operations
with SNGs. EBRD, AFD and IFC have successfully mainstreamed this type

18

Decentralization and Subnational Governments Sector Framework (GN-2813-13).

19

IDB Group Institutional Strategy: Transforming for Scale and Impact (document CA-631).

20

This may include, for example, local sectoral reforms, municipal governance, enhanced
regulatory frameworks, improved tariff/tax regimes, public management, improved service
standards, or financial and debt management.

-7of lending into their operations, offering loans on commercial terms,
with very low rates of non-performing assets, and a growing portfolio. A
more detailed assessment is in Annex I.
2.13

Several IFIs already extend sub-sovereign finance to SNGs in LAC.
Since 2017, the IFC, and more recently, AFD and the Development Bank
of Latin America and The Caribbean (CAF) have approved 10 nonsovereign guaranteed (NSG) loans to SNGs in 4 countries in LAC (see
Table 1) for a total value of around US$890 million, in a mixture of US$,
Euros and local currency.
Table 1: Non-sovereign Guaranteed Operations in LAC
Year

Borrower

Lender

Value

Currency

Sector

2017

Ciudad Autónoma
de Buenos Aires
(AR)

IFC

100.0 +
50.0M

US$

Mobility
improvement
(metro, BRT, bus)

A+B
loans

2017

Provincia de
Córdoba (AR)

IFC

100.0 +
50.0M

US$

Road
infrastructure
improvements

A+B
loans

2019

Bogotá Distrito
Capital (CO)

IFC

120.0M

US$

BRT network
expansion

Loan

2019

Bogotá Distrito
Capital (CO)

IFC

30.0M

US$

Cablecar
network
expansion

Loan

2020

Municipalidad de
San Jose (CR)

IFC

eq. US$
12.0M

LC

Road & drainage
improvement

Loan

2021

Municipalidad de
Barranquilla (CO)

AFD

eq. €120M

LC

Urban
environmental
restoration &
flood control

Loan

2022

Fideicomiso
Administración de
Canelones 2022
(UR)

CAF

12.0M

US$

Urban public
spaces, buildings
& mobility
improvement

Loan

2023

Municipalidad de
Barranquilla (CO)

AFD

eq. €50.0M

LC

Urban
environmental
restoration &
flood control

Loan

2023

Municipalidad de
Bogotá (CO)

AFD

eq.
€150.0M

LC

Infrastructure
(greening,
mobility, & waste
recovery)

Loan

2024

Provincia de Santa
Fe (AR)

AFD

€65M

Euro

Biodiversity

Loan

Source: Project team analysis from publicly available data and interviews.

Product

-8-

2.14

Outside the region, the EBRD has valuable long-standing experience.
With over two decades of experience lending to local and regional
authorities (around 250 clients), and a sub-sovereign portfolio of
approximately €2 billion, EBRD’s Municipal and Environmental
Infrastructure sector lends annually around €350-450 million directly to
SNGs in support of decentralization, commercialization and green
economy transition objectives in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and North
Africa. EBRD’s projects typically range €5-100 million in size; with typical
tenors of 10–12 years and grace periods adjusted accordingly (typically 3
years). Lending is based on cost-recovery principles and commercial
pricing is applied, based on risk. EBRD approaches its clients with long
term engagement considerations, thus project design (complemented
with technical cooperation resources) incorporates capacity building
and targeted institutional development.

2.15

IFC’s experience is also relevant. Established in November 2006, the IFC
Subnational Finance program provides senior, subordinated, and
convertible loans, partial credit guarantees, risk sharing facilities, equity,
and hybrid instruments to creditworthy SNGs and local SOEs. IFC’s SNG
portfolio is considerably smaller than EBRD’s, 21 focusing on SNGs with
strong financial standing, rather than utilities. This has enabled financing
of projects without direct revenue potential, but where credit risk was
mitigated by the client’s overall credit strength. It has allowed in some
cases the structuring of A-B loans, bringing in commercial banks as
cofinanciers. In addition to non- recourse finance, IFC’s subnational
finance program provides advisory services, support for PPP structuring
and to private sector investment in client cities. In terms of sub-sector
exposure, as per recent reports, water/waste-water accounts for 18% of
the portfolio, solid waste management for 18%, district cooling for 1%,
while the remainder of 63% is categorized as “municipal”.

2.16

A few important lessons can be derived from other IFI’s experience
lending to SNGs without a sovereign guarantee:
a.

21

Enabling environment. Working with SNGs and their companies
might involve working with evolving and untested legal and
regulatory frameworks. In some instances, institutions can borrow
through asset-holding companies or special purpose vehicles.
Conducting legal due diligence in any given country to confirm
the adequacy of legal and regulatory systems will be an additional
requirement but once completed, it will be applicable to most
transactions within the same country.

As of June 2021, IFC’s municipal infrastructure portfolio stood at a total of US$1.25 billion: 27% of
the portfolio was in Latin America and the Caribbean, 35% in Emerging Europe and Central Asia,
20% in the rest of Asia, 27% in the Middle East and North Africa, and 8% in the rest of Africa.

-9-

22

b.

Business development. Although sub-sovereign transactions
target a well-established group of clients, the instrument requires
new and/or additional compliance prerequisites and calls for best
practice in public management, which can be resource intensive.
To manage risks, loans should be sized conservatively and
combined with deep client relations. Sub-sovereign operations
are subject to sound banking principles. Although a selected
group presents a solid financial standing and sound operating
efficiencies, for most SNGs, reforms might be a precondition,
requiring continued and long-term engagement with the client.

c.

Planning and project structuring. While several large and
emerging cities and SNGs in the region have global frontier
planning and project design processes, many medium and small
cities face heightened barriers due to insufficient or outdated
planning instruments, lacking capacity to prepare and structure a
pipeline of projects that may attract investment, limited ability to
manage procurement and contract execution, as well as ESG and
integrity risks. A new program should attend to these.

d.

Moral Hazard. Although the rate of default in sub-sovereign
lending remains low 22 among IFIs, largely thanks to close portfolio
monitoring and debt management capacity development
among SNGs, default spells may occur occasionally (e.g. in
conflict-affected areas). MDB’s SNG fiscal and financial
management oversight and guidance have been critical, and in
rare severe cases, debt restructuring was necessary. IFIs’
sub-sovereign lending also accounts for probability of default in
their pricing and provisions.

e.

Transaction Costs. While sub-sovereign financing project
preparation costs might be higher than for sovereign
transactions, many IFIs share costs with clients. Mandate letters
outline the scope of the project but also include information about
the terms of the loan and operational expenses and
responsibilities, including TC components and costs to be borne
by the client during the project preparation phase.

A recent report from the Global Emerging Markets Risk Database (Default Statistics: Private And
Sub-sovereign Lending 1994-2022 - Volume 1) highlights that for a global dataset consisting of
1,115 sub-sovereign counterparts (of a total of 10,608), the average default rate for sub-sovereigns
over the 1994-2022 period was 2.4% versus a 3.5% default rate for private counterparts. The subsovereign exposure for Latin America and the Caribbean in this global study represents 12% of
the total.

- 10 f.

Staff Skills. A limited skills base can be a key factor inhibiting the
growth of a sub-sovereign lending portfolio. Project development,
financing and structuring, and portfolio management of subsovereign operations requires additional complementary skills to
those applied in sovereign operations. Retraining, hiring of limited
additional staff, and synergies between public and private sector
functions can help circumvent some of these challenges.

g.

Integrated Approaches. Most successful cases have been
grounded on principles of (i) increasing readiness to subnational
development, that understands sub-sovereign finance as a
complementary instrument to sovereign and non-sovereign
private sector finance; (ii) anchoring individual transactions in a
more holistic vision of city/regional development and the
application of a programmatic approach, which might include
other forms of investment; and (iii) adoption of an integrated
methodology to support fiscal, planning, technical and execution
capabilities at subnational levels and transition to commercial
borrowing from private entities.

III.

JUSTIFICATION

3.1

In 2004, IDB’s Management developed and proposed the establishment
of a pilot program to enable sub-sovereign lending (GN-2125-5). The pilot
program, which supported principles of graduation of IDB’s assistance
to subnational entities and was to be funded within the 10% limit set
aside for Private Sector Operations, was deferred while IDB evaluated
new eligible sectors and borrowers for non-sovereign lending 23.

3.2

Since then, three structural long-term trends have contributed to the
rising demand for sub-sovereign finance: (i) firstly, continuing
decentralization processes in many countries of the region have
perfected the development of subnational fiscal responsibility
frameworks; (ii) secondly, incomplete and continuously transforming
urbanization requires of large-scale infrastructure investments to bring
cities and SNGs in the region at par with those most productive globally;
and (iii) thirdly, capital markets in several countries in LAC have
undergone important growth and development, and are not fully
utilized by SNGs (as suggested by their low indebtedness levels).

23

Pursuant to document GN-2125-7, it was considered that the revised proposal regarding
subnationals should not be re-submitted to the Policy and Evaluation Committee until the
Board had reached some conclusion regarding the overall restructuring of the Bank’s support
to the private sector.

- 11 3.3

In addition, the impending effects of recent global crises and increasing
frequency and size of natural disasters, have highlighted (i) firstly, the
need for effective participation of multiple actors and, with most of the
population living in cities in LAC, local governments have a key role to
play in advancing adaptation and mitigation agendas, building resiliency
and reducing disaster risk in physical spaces and communities, and
(ii) secondly, in a post-pandemic recovery phase, leveraging regional and
local competitiveness and social agendas, can contribute to reducing
territorial disparities.

3.4

The proposed SFP highlights complementarities between IDB and IDB
Invest in light of the fact that, IDB Invest oversees financing to corporate
entities in the region, while IDB is responsible for providing financial and
technical support to national and sub-national governments in LAC. 24
Sub-sovereign financing can provide a coordinated approach,
encompassing sector reforms, alternative structuring, market-based
financial products, and de-risking mechanisms, that intentionally
prepares SNGs for engaging with private sector actors (investors or
lenders) in the medium term.

A.

Investment Needs

3.5

Advancing
commitments
towards
meeting
Sustainable
Development Goals (SGDs) in LAC will require over US$2,220 billion in
water and sanitation, energy, transport, and telecommunication
infrastructure by 2030 (IDB, 2021) 25, all of which will be essential to
raise the region’s productivity levels. Fifty-nine percent of this value
will be needed for new infrastructure investment. This would represent
an annual investment of 3.12 percent of the GDP, up from the current 1.8
percent. Although these figures include investment needs at all levels,
several countries in LAC have entrusted service provision responsibility
to subnational governments. For example, in Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Mexico and Peru, municipalities oversee water and
sanitation, including at times the establishment of dedicated utilities
under public or private concession operation. Venezuela has created
regional water companies, while state-level water companies also coexist in all 26 states of Brazil and the Federal District, where they provide
services on behalf of some (but not all) municipalities in their respective
jurisdiction. Similarly, municipal, and metropolitan transport network
companies and municipal departments are primarily responsible for
developing and maintaining local metro (19 cities) and light rail, bus, and

24

Pursuant to Resolution AG-9/15 and CCI/AG-2/15 (Busan Resolution), lending to state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) without sovereign guarantee shall be carried out by IIC. This would include
SOEs fully or partially owned by an SNG. In addition, said Resolution also explicitly precludes the
IIC from financing operations with sub-sovereign governments.

25

IDB. 2021. The infrastructure gap in Latin America and the Caribbean: investment needed
through 2030 to meet the sustainable development goals. Washington DC.

- 12 BRT (54 cities), and cable car systems, which two-thirds of Latin
Americans use for daily transit. Public transit operators are progressively
taking an increasing share of the operating and, at times, capital
investment burden. Nonetheless, SNGs often face significant financial
constraints and limited technical capacity, which can hinder their ability
to meet the required infrastructure commitments. This creates
disparities in service provision across regions and municipalities, more so
in the face of increased adaptation needs. To better understand the
significance of these issues, IDB is developing an infrastructure gap
analysis that builds on previous estimates by incorporating newly
measured local gaps using micro-data available from cities across the
region. The goal of such estimation is to increase the granularity of the
results and incorporate differences in the cost of building and operating
infrastructure under different geographical and socio-economic
contexts. This work will also look at the main institutional constraints that
hinder the capabilities of subnational governments to close the
identified gaps.
3.6

Meeting the SDGs also requires investments in social infrastructure
and services, particularly in the context of care services,
encompassing long-term care, childcare, and healthcare, among
others. Caregiving tasks are frequently non-remunerated and fall
disproportionally on women. The demand for long-term care services is
expected to more than triple in the next 30 years due to population
aging. Care dependence affects 12 percent of people over 60 and almost
27 percent of people over 80 in the region. Some countries in LAC are
establishing long-term care systems, including Costa Rica, Chile, and
Argentina. 26 While there are vast differences across countries, healthcare
systems are generally under-resourced. On average, in 14 LAC countries
during 2020, 16 percent of urban households and 21 percent of rural
households could not access any type of healthcare services when
needed. In Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia, these percentages were above 27
percent for urban households and reached 40 percent for rural
households in Peru. Long-term improvement in life expectancy in LAC
remains unequally distributed, and maternal and child health is much
worse than the OECD average. 27 Several countries in LAC have entrusted
healthcare and other social welfare services to SNGs.

3.7

Green, resilient, low-carbon development requires additional
investment at local level. A high concentration of people and assets
makes cities in LAC particularly vulnerable. In this region, which includes
13 of the 50 countries most susceptible to disaster-related shocks, and
where as much as 80 percent of the total losses caused by disasters in
LAC are produced in urban areas, building adaptation measures is

26

IDB. 2019. Age with Care: Long-term Care in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington DC.

27

OECD. 2023. Health at a Glance: Latin America and the Caribbean 2023. Paris

- 13 important. 28 Additionally, due to factors such as city geometry, design,
choice of materials, and anthropogenic activities, urban centers
experience substantially higher temperatures compared to their
surrounding peri-urban and rural areas, in what is commonly known as
urban heat island effect. Responsible for an estimated one‑third of total
regional emissions, LAC cities can also play a critical part in achieving
mitigation objectives, enabling solutions linked to mobility, energy use
and efficiency, waste management, and construction choices. Globally,
it is estimated that more than 70 percent of the total value needed for
low-emission climate-resilient infrastructure will be in built urban
areas, 29 yet a recent study 30 found that only 21 percent of tracked climaterelated MDB finance was assigned to urban projects between 2015 and
2022. 31 Meeting country commitment targets made under international
agreements, requires localizing action and engaging with multiple
actors, particularly SNGs, strengthening urban planning, urban
development and incorporating resiliency measures in the public space
and built environment.
B.

Fiscal Advances

3.8

In the past 40 years, the participation of SNGs in spending public
aggregate has increased in LAC. Following rapid growth – from 13
percent to 25 percent between 1985 and 2010 – aggregate spending has
stabilized (IDB, 2022). 32 However, the size of the subnational public sector
in LAC varies greatly from one country to another, owing to historical
backgrounds and geographical size and population. While SNGs execute
approximately 40 percent of consolidated expenditures in federal
countries like Mexico, Argentina, Brazil (representing between 12 and 18
percent of their respective national GDPs), and some unitary countries
like Peru and Colombia (equivalent to 14 percent and 7 percent of their
GDP, respectively), in other countries like Costa Rica, Panama or Jamaica
it is closer to 5 percent.

28

World Bank. 2021. A Roadmap for Climate Action in Latin America and the Caribbean 2021-2025.
Washington DC.

29

CCFLA. 2015. The State of Climate Finance, 2015. London.

30

CCFLA. 2023. Accelerating Urban Climate Finance to Cities in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries. London.

31

Cognizant of constraints associated with size, revenues and access to public debt and credit,
national governments in the region are exploring alternative finance mechanisms in the form
of subnational consortia to finance climate resilient municipal infrastructure, which by its public
good nature or the positive/negative externalities generated, could benefit multiple
municipalities. [IDB. 2021. Pooled Finance: Brazil’s Opportunity to Finance Subnational
Sustainable Infrastructure. Washington DC.]

32

IDB. 2022. Panorama de las relaciones fiscales entre niveles de gobierno de países de América
Latina y el Caribe

- 14 3.9

Average subnational government borrowing in LAC countries is
around 3 percent of GDP (compared to 12 percent in OECD countries),
which dropped from around 7 percent in 2002, owing in part to the
effective implementation of subnational fiscal responsibility frameworks.
Subnational debt is primarily taken at provincial and state/provincial
levels (e.g., Brazil’s states overall debt amounts to 11.1 percent of its GDP
while Argentina’s provinces’ debt represents 6.3 percent and Colombia’s
departments 3.9 percent). Loans are the primary source of external
funding for SNGs in LAC (65 percent of the total outstanding debt),
followed by bonds and debt securities and insurance pension and
standardized guarantees, at about 12 percent each. Responsible
long-term borrowing can help SNGs adequately implement investment
plans and local priorities, financing ‘lumpy’ infrastructure and services
effectively, rather than on an annual budget ‘pay-as-you-go’ basis, and
leverage intergenerational equity. Borrowing may also assist the
smoothing of asynchronous tax revenues and expenditures and foster
accountability.

C.

Improving Access to Private Sector Financing

3.10

Capital markets in LAC have grown substantially and are making it
possible to progressively channel domestic savings toward longterm infrastructure financing in local currency through local
institutional investors. 33 However, tapping domestic private savings
markets for long-term financing at subnational level requires the
increasing adoption of adequate practices, many of which are new for
SNGs. These might include improved credit histories and engaging in
formal credit ratings, defining appropriate debt instruments (e.g., bonds,
commercial banks) or developing mechanisms that reduce credit and
liquidity risks (e.g., guarantees, reserve accounts, secondary markets,
credit enhancement schemes). Strengthening SNGs, and assisting them
as they increase their market borrowing, will not only allow them to
diversify financing options, but will also generate confidence and assist
in the development of growing subnational debt markets.

3.11

Accountable, transparent, and efficient frameworks are a
precondition for attracting private investment. The capacity of SNGs
to finance investments such as infrastructure through own-source
revenues and inter-governmental transfers is limited, creating funding
gaps for meeting current and future needs. The ability of SNGs to attract
private finance is, however, a function of the quality of prevailing
frameworks and systems (e.g. land and property) that can help project
financial flows. To make sensible credit and investment decisions,
investors require: (i) quality financial data, accounts, and adequate
management systems; (ii) increasingly robust structures to manage

33

Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay have infrastructure equity and/or debt funds
and/or securitize infrastructure assets (GN-2768-12).

- 15 project risks, including integrity and ESG; and (iii) a robust regulatory
framework for investing. 34 Strengthening SNGs competences, enabling
legal and institutional grounds for new funding and financing
mechanisms; accompanying the development and uptake of new
financing instruments to expand their revenue base (e.g. land value
capture, land pooling or land banks); and helping build-in mechanisms
to address possible negative impacts on vulnerable and marginalized
groups, are essential.
D.

Changing Financial Architecture

3.12

As part of the discussions on changes to the international financial
architecture, there are increasing calls to include urban climate
action, finance, and technical assistance to cities. At COP28 in Dubai,
think tanks like CCFLA and CPI, in collaboration with city networks C40
and GCoM, launched a report 35 presenting an assessment of ten MDBs’
contributions to urban finance in low-and-middle income countries and
recommendations to position urban climate finance as an important
element in the MDB reform agenda. In March 2024, in advance of the
World Bank Group Spring Meetings, the Mayors of the C40 Cities
network signed an open letter to the Presidents of the MDBs aligned to
the report’s recommendations. In 2024 also, U20 (a diplomacy initiative
providing a lasting platform for cities to engage with the G20), co-chaired
by Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, prioritized topics of global governance
reform and unlocking finance for urban sustainable development, with
a focus on resilience. 36
IV.

PROPOSAL

A.

Objective of the SFP

4.1

The general objective of the SFP is to assist eligible SNGs to promote
sustainable regions and local development by improving access to
market financing. The specific objectives of the SFP are (i) to strengthen
SNGs’ fiscal and financial management, (ii) to strengthen SNGs’
capacities to structure and implement project pipelines, and (iii) to
improve service delivery and infrastructure at the subnational level. To
achieve this objective, the SFP will finance, during a five-year pilot basis,

34

R. White & S. Wahba. Addressing constraints to private financing of urban (climate)
infrastructure in developing countries. International Journal of Urban Sustainable Development,
Vol. 11, 2019 – Issue 3: Planning and Financing climate-safe cities.

35

CCFLA. 2023. Accelerating Urban Climate Finance in Low- and Middle- Income Countries: An
Important Strategic Dimension of MDB Reform.

36

U20 Co-Chairs Statement 2024.

- 16 investment loans and guarantees without a sovereign guarantee or
sovereign counter-guarantee, as the case may be, to eligible SNGs. 37
4.2

The SFP will be open to SNGs from all IDB borrowing member
countries. SNG eligibility to be subject to financing under the SFP will be
determined, among other requirements 38, by: (i) their ability to contract
and obtain external financing from the IDB without the guarantee of the
sovereign; and (ii) their credit strength, financial viability, legal capacity
and good governance practices (including managerial capacity, fiscal
track record, planning, and fiscal controls, which should be indicative of
their ability to promptly pay their debts), and will be underpinned by an
early creditworthiness assessment, among others. Furthermore, SNGs
will only be eligible provided that the SNGs and the central/federal
governments are not in non-accrual.

4.3

To be eligible, projects under the SFP will need to respond to 3
simultaneous criteria: (i) high developmental impact, (ii) preventing
private sector financing crowding out, and (iii) improved SNG
efficiency and effectiveness. These are described in further detail in the
next paragraphs.

4.4

Projects under the SFP will seek to have a high developmental
impact, including through elements such as reform and/or private
sector synergies, 39 and demonstration effects, where relevant.
Consistent with Impact+, the SFP will focus on financing projects whose
purpose is to transform for impact 40 and scale, reinforcing institutional
core objectives of addressing climate change, reducing poverty and
inequality, and bolstering sustainable growth through infrastructure and
productivity. SFP will also align itself to IDB’s 7 operational focus areas,
including target themes and cross-cutting areas for mainstreaming. In

37

Policy-based lending or short-term borrowing for cash flow or liquidity issues, balance budgets,
fiscal deficits, recurrent expenditures, or refinancing debt will not be eligible for financing under
the SFP.

38

Legal, operational, financial, and institutional requirements as set forth in the Bank’s policies
shall also apply for determining the SNGs eligibility.

39

In implementing the SFP, efforts will be made from the onset to (i) cofinance with private sector
(including local capital market entities) and/or (ii) cost-share, where appropriate, with client
SNGs.

40

To evaluate developmental impact, projects will be aligned to IDB’s Impact + core objectives and
have a measurable effect (scale, demonstration, replicability etc.) in key developmental areas,
such as poverty or vulnerability reduction, support to the implementation of the SDGs,
improvement of livability and/or socio-economic conditions, green development, key policy
and/or institutional changes, among others. Considering the general objective of the SFP, high
developmental impact projects may also include for example projects aimed at scaling
sustainable SNG investment, improving private sector participation in subnational
infrastructure and services, improving SNG borrowing capacity and fiscal responsibility, or
increased participation of local capital markets in SNG financing, among others.

- 17 all cases, long-term sustainability elements (institutional, fiscal and
financial, technical, social and environmental) will be analyzed.
4.5

In evaluating proposals, sub-sovereign projects will be carefully
screened to prevent crowding out and to potentially attract
(crowding in) private sector financing. To do so, the pilot will finance
projects that meet one or more of the following eligibility criteria: (i)
projects whose nature cannot attract private sector financing and IDB’s
involvement can catalyze private sector interest, 41 (ii) projects that will
strengthen SNGs’ technical, administrative, fiscal, structuring and/or
execution capacities aiming to improve their readiness to engage in
private sector financing, (iii) projects that complement private sector
financing (e.g. PPPs) and/or intentionally attract commercial
cofinancing and other relevant nontraditional lenders, and/or (iv) the
SNG has insufficient access to capital markets. 42

4.6

IDB’s value addition will stem from its ability to support subsovereign investments and reforms 43 that would help SNGs improve
efficiency, quality of service provision, own-revenue generation,
financial management, and/or debt management. 44 During project
preparation, the Bank will not only ensure that SNGs’ repayment
revenue streams are stable, predictable, and adequate, but will also seek
to improve SNG’s income - either through (i) new revenues or reduced
expenses (e.g. resulting from efficiencies) linked to the project, or
(ii) associated reforms and investments 45 - that improve repayment

41

Projects with high risk or low return profiles might not be attractive to private sector (e.g.
complex projects with important non-financial factors influencing benefits/costs calculations,
projects with substantial externalities, some public goods, etc.). However, IDB can raise private
sector interest by addressing the market’s concerns through applicable actions or mechanisms
such as institutional strengthening, project monitoring, application of or changing the loan
structures. to make it more bankable.

42

This might include reasons such as underdeveloped capital markets, insufficient/imperfect
credit products/lines for SNGs, or the prevalence of risk rating tools unable to adequately
evaluate credit conditions of SNGs, among others.

43

This might include, for example, improved asset management, accounting systems,
expenditure efficiency, service regulation, tax collection, new/revised tariff regimes,
development or improvement of land capture instruments, etc.

44

Wherever possible, to promote scale-up, teams will, in parallel, engage with the central
government to support improved intergovernmental arrangements for more and better
subnational services. At the central level of government, this includes clarification of expenditure
responsibilities among levels of government; improvements to own-revenue sources of SNG;
reforms to intergovernmental transfers; enhancement of subnational fiscal responsibility
frameworks and surveillance; strengthening of governing bodies related to subnational
governments; and development of technical assistance programs to improve fiscal institutional
capacities of SNG.

45

These are reforms and investments that might have been undertaken in the frame of (i) early
IDB engagement (e.g. through TC resources) with the SNG and/or (ii) at the time of confirming
project eligibility, and that will lead to additional income for the SNG.

- 18 capacity and can help to partly service the debt. 46 Moreover, when
assessing SNG revenue streams/funding sources, the Bank will consider
the following aspects and assist strengthening, where relevant:
(i) stability and predictability, (ii) diversity of revenue sources, (iii) equity
and fairness, (iv) economic impact, (v) administrative efficiency, (vi) legal
and regulatory constraints and (vii) public acceptance. 47
4.7

IDB’s value addition will also derive from knowledge harnessed and
shared regionally. To help foster development impact and achieve scale,
the following channels will be leveraged: (i) data platforms like IDB's
Subnational Fiscal Database Platform, which disseminates and helps
improve available SNG fiscal and financial information in LAC, and
(ii) regional networks like IDB’s Cities’ Financial Secretaries’ Network and
IDB’s Decentralization and Subnational Fiscal Management Network,
which promote peer-to-peer learning and capacity development. The
Bank will also seek to strengthen its knowledge exchange network with
other IFIs through periodic encounters.

4.8

To operationalize the SFP, technical assistance will be necessary to:
(i) early in the process, assess and/or enable SNG reforms, and enhance
capacities in fiscal and financial management, regulatory regimes, tariff
setting, planning, asset management, service delivery, operational
performance, and private sector participation, among others; and
(ii) subject to SNG eligibility, operationalize the SFP, including activities
such as project preparation, structuring, procurement and execution,
contract management, and compliance with IDB’s policies. This is
essential to assist the modernization of governments, strengthen
institutions and create capacities within SNGs, and enable essential
gradual change. Technical assistance (in the form of regular and
contingent TC) and IDB specialized technical personnel will support exante readiness to engage in sub-sovereign financing, the preparation of
operational documentation for Bank’s due diligence and approval, and
post-approval implementation and repayment.

46

The repayment capacity is a key consideration when assessing credit risk and is part of the SNG
credit risk framework. Adequate consideration will be given in financial analyses conducted as
part of IDB’s due diligence.

47

Revenue sources should be stable and predictable to allow for effective budgeting and longterm planning. Relying on a mix of revenue streams, such as property taxes, sales taxes, income
taxes, and service fees, can help mitigate risks associated with economic fluctuations. The tax
burden should be distributed fairly among actors (e.g. residents, businesses etc.), including
considerations regarding the ability to pay, and ensuring that no group is disproportionately
affected. The cost and complexity of administering different revenue sources should also be
taken into account.

- 19 B.

The SFP as a Pilot

4.9

The SFP will be established as a pilot program with the objective of
demonstrating the feasibility of IDB’s sub-sovereign financing to
selected SNGs and providing grounds for learning and scale up. The
pilot will have an initial duration of 5 years and, consistent with the SFP,
will be available to eligible SNGs from all IDB borrowing member
countries. The pilot will generate evidence needed to: (i) ascertain the
potential market for SFP and demand for this product, mapping
prospective SNGs and initiating key reforms for eligibility under a fasttracked figure; (ii) test new and/or revised guidelines/procedures
appropriate for processing and supervision of sub-sovereign operations;
(iii) evaluate new systems (e.g. credit risk, resource mobilization, integrity
risk) and institutional arrangements required under the SFP; (iv) develop
IDB’s personnel strength and determine the extent of retraining and
new skills that might be required and (v) assess IDB’s efficiency and
effectiveness implementing such instrument. The pilot will also generate
information on cofinancing and cost-sharing, and early outcomes from
the use of the instrument, outlining its potential for growth and/or
challenges encountered. The pilot nature of the SFP proposes a gradual,
results-focused approach to extract lessons and manage risks. It will help
IDB determine whether mainstreaming of the program is desirable, its
scope and scale.

4.10

The SFP pilot will be structured as follows: (i) a sub-sovereign
investment financing subprogram (Subprogram 1); and (ii) a technical
cooperation sub-sovereign readiness subprogram (Subprogram 2).
Under Subprogram 1, sub-sovereign financing will be provided to eligible
SNGs through investment loans and investment guarantees without a
sovereign guarantee or counter-guarantee, as the case may be, in US
dollars or local currency. 48 Financing will be based on credit risk and
commercial principles, and pricing will be market-based. It is projected
that under the pilot, approximately 8 to 10 individual operations will be
financed under the SFP, 49 promoting geographic diversity and
borrowers of different types and sizes, including intermediate cities. 50,51

48

Financing in local currency dollar will be subject to, among others, market availability,
operational, legal and risk management considerations.

49

The number of operations is tentative and has been extrapolated from average loan sizes for
SNGs that have recently borrowed directly with a sovereign guarantee or from other IFIs (Table
1).

50

Management will establish indicative per country, per borrower and per project lending limits
to seek effective portfolio diversification and maximizing use of economic capital.

51

The pilot aims to maximize learning and outcomes. In case of high demand, the SFP Operating
Guidelines will attempt to balance the following parameters at portfolio level: (i) geographic
diversity (region, country, context); (ii) different SNG typologies (levels of government, size); and
(iii) varying degrees of SNG capacity (debt capacity, fiscal and financial management, project
preparation, etc.) .

- 20 For purposes of Subprogram 1, a total amount of US$1 billion from the
Bank’s Ordinary Capital resources will be allocated for the financing of
investment loans and investment guarantees. 52 Loans and guarantees to
be financed with Banks’ resources might also be supported with
financial resources to be provided by external partners, either resources
administered by the Bank, or by partner institutions, as the case may be.
Under Subprogram 2, resources will be used for the financing of
technical assistance to provide: (i) non-reimbursable technical
cooperation (TC) resources to support reforms, capacity building and
project prefeasibility to SNGs deemed to be prospective borrowers
(including good governance and ESG standards); and (ii) contingent
recovery TC resources for project design (including e.g. detailed design,
procurement, and other project structuring needs). 53
4.11

Consistent with SFP criteria outlined in paragraph 4.3, projects under
the pilot will prioritize SNG mandates of inclusive and efficient
services, sustainable and resilient infrastructure and urban
development. 54 The SFP pilot will also finance, investments necessary to
improve SNG’s public finances and management (e.g. revenue collection
systems, administrative efficiencies, public financial management,
digitalization, etc.). This reflects current portfolio demand patterns
outlined in paragraph 2.5 and Table 1.

4.12

Technical assistance resources for the 5-year pilot period, are
estimated at approximately US$13 million. This would be required to
support (i) SNGs’ efforts (including an expected US$4 million for regular
TCs and US$6 million for contingent recovery TCs) and (ii) US$3 million in
TC resources for pilot implementation and monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) needs. To execute the outlined activities and timely prepare and
approve sub-sovereign operations, TC funds should be made available in
the first 4 years of pilot implementation. TC resources might come from
two sources: (i) the Bank’s Ordinary Capital resources annually allocated
under the Special Development Program; and/or (ii) Donor or Partner
funds under Bank administration. 55, 56

52

This represents, in average, less than 1% of average IDB’s loans outstanding.

53

TCs under this subprogram will be consistent with the Proposal for a new Bank policy on
technical cooperation (GN-2470-2) and the Operational Guidelines for Technical Cooperation
Products (GN-2629-1), as amended from time to time.

54

Overall infrastructure loan performance generally has a lower risk profile than corporate loans.

55

Such grant mobilization strategy would consider existing donor funds and programs, and
potential new contributions through different modalities, providing a flexible framework to
identify best funding mechanisms, avoid duplication and ensure efficiency on the use of
resources.

56

Cost-sharing of preparatory activities/studies will be discussed and agreed with prospective
SNGs.

- 21 4.13

As part of the pilot, a new SNG readiness approach to fast-track
access to sub-sovereign finance will be developed and evaluated. For
this purpose, SNGs across LAC will be assessed for readiness. This will be
based on an evaluation of: (i) their legal capacity to borrow without a
sovereign guarantee; (ii) creditworthiness, including intergovernmental
arrangements and fiscal conditions, considering aspects of compliance
with national fiscal rules (to ensure fiscal responsibility), an assessment
of fiscal health and autonomy indicators (e.g. percentage of own-source
and non-earmarked revenues; ratio of debt to operating income; etc.),
and a review of available credit ratings to evaluate market assessments
of fiscal stability; and (iii) governance, institutional, transparency and
integrity elements, amongst others. A customized fiscal sustainability
analysis will be conducted case by case to evaluate the specific needs
and contexts of potentially eligible entities, providing tailored insights
and recommendations for enhancing fiscal management and
sustainability. 57

C.

Operational Considerations

4.14

The following operational considerations will apply to the financing of
loans and guarantees under the SFP. 58 This section covers an overview
of applicable SFP processes, legal due diligence, credit risk assessment
and integrity, fiduciary and safeguards due diligence, programming, and
mobilization aspects.

4.15

Outline SFP Processes. Operating Guidelines for preparing and
processing SFP operations will be defined and approved by
Management and will consider expanded due diligence to assess credit
risk, legal and integrity risks. 59 These will be circulated to the Board for
information. Due diligence on fiduciary and safeguards’ policies relevant
to sovereign processes will continue to apply. Project teams will, at an

57

The fiscal sustainability analysis will include a quantitative and qualitative assessment that
considers, among other: (i) fiscal trends and projections, with stress scenarios; (ii) contingent
liabilities, including from state-owned subnational enterprises; public partnerships; pensions;
and natural disasters; (iii) fiscal transparency and sound financial management practices; and
(iv) benchmarking with other similar subnational governments. This analysis will be an input in
the identification of areas of fiscal management strengthening for enhanced creditworthiness.

58

Individual investment loan and investment guarantee operations financed under the SFP will
be subject to the terms of this proposal and the current policies applicable to sovereign
guaranteed operations, as amended from time to time.

59

It is envisaged that the procedures for processing of projects under the SFP, to be defined by
Management, may include review instances to, for example, (1) early assess whether an SNG is
eligible or not considering aspects such as (i) the SNG’s legal capacity to borrow, (ii) SNGs’ credit
risk assessment, (iii) integrity risks and institutional capacity, and (iv) expected project impact;
and subsequently, (2) conduct a quality and risk review of the proposal including (i) credit
analysis and rating, (ii) development impact and technical elements, (iii) financial and nonfinancial risks, (iv) financial and non-financial additionality, (v) fiduciary and safeguards, and (vi)
integrity and legal aspects.

- 22 early stage, discuss with client SNGs due diligence costs, client
responsibilities in preparatory phases and TC resources.
4.16

Strategic core departments are expected to perform the second line role
of the Bank’s risk management governance, and will have the capacity,
in processing stages, to independently review and evaluate the
proposed operations.

4.17

Approval of SFP operations by the Board. Loan and investment
guarantee operations financed under the SFP will follow the approval
procedures applicable to sovereign guaranteed (SG) operations
(document GN-1838-3, 60 as may be amended from time to time).

4.18

Legal Frameworks. Consistent with the Bank’s operational regulations
on eligible borrowers (OP-301), SNGs shall demonstrate that they are
legally empowered and authorized to enter into loan agreements with
the Bank, or counter-guarantee agreements in the case of investment
guarantee operations, and must also fulfill all other legal, institutional,
operational, and financial requirements set forth in the operational
regulations. Determination on the ability of SNGs to access direct
financing without a sovereign guarantee will be carried out on a projectby-project basis.

4.19

In addition to the requirements set forth in the proposal, each individual
operation will be subject to a sound due diligence to determine, among
others, the following: (i) types of collateral, if any, that could be
required/acceptable to the Bank (e.g. liens, guarantee trusts, escrow
accounts, etc.); (ii) the capability of the SNG to grant pledges against its
assets (including fiscal and other sources of revenue).

4.20

Credit Risk Framework. SFP, as an NSG program, will require the
introduction of a new credit risk framework to underpin the IDB’s credit
risk decision making. The Bank will adopt a credit risk framework to
(i) enable processing of SNG operations, including screening of
financially viable operations from non-viable operations; (ii) define an
appropriate credit risk methodology to apply to sub-sovereign
transactions; (iii) conduct credit risk assessment during the project cycle;
(iv) assign credit ratings at entry, and during quality review and closing
stages of processing, as well as during the implementation and
repayment life of the project; and (v) set the program’s risk limits.

4.21

Fiduciary Considerations. The SFP does not require any deviation from
the Bank’s policies and regulations on procurement and financial
management. The procurement of Works, Goods, and Services will be

60

Report of the Working Group of the Board of Executive Directors of the Inter-American
Development Bank on Streamlining Approval Procedures for Sovereign-Guaranteed
Operations. Revised Version (document GN-1838-3).

- 23 executed in accordance with the Procurement Policies (document GN2349-15 and GN-2350-15, as amended). The Bank will conduct
assessments of the borrower's and/or executing agency’s fiduciary
systems, a risk analysis, and a capacity assessment. Pursuant to GN-253831, the Bank may assess the borrower's and/or executing agency’s
fiduciary systems to determine their compliance with the requirements
set forth for their validation and authorization for use in Bank-financed
operations. Key fiduciary arrangements will be established for the
execution phase and opportunities for institutional strengthening
identified, followed by regular monitoring during implementation.
During project preparation, the estimated expenditures needed for the
investment will be analyzed to determine the necessary amount of
financing.
4.22

Integrity. From early on in the process and throughout the project cycle,
the Bank will: (i) identify and assess integrity risks (including institutional
and context-related vulnerabilities) and the potential negative impacts
that such risks could have on the Bank’s development objectives and
reputation; (ii) evaluate the capacity and mechanisms of the
borrower/executing agency to manage integrity risks; 61 and
(iii) recommend specific actions (including training and technical
assistance to strengthen capacity) to mitigate integrity risks and the risk
of negative impacts on the Bank’s reputation or development objectives.
The specific risk mitigation actions will be incorporated into the design,
institutional arrangements and/or execution mechanisms of the project
and its implementation monitored during execution and adjusted if
needed.

4.23

To assess integrity risks, IDB will: (i) apply an institutional capacity
assessment module tailored to SNGs’ characteristics; (ii) identify relevant
parties with significant roles in the SFP; and (iii) perform due diligence
on those relevant parties and the SNG. IDB will monitor changes to the
integrity profile of the SFP during the life cycle of the operation. Finally –
as in all IDB Group financed operations – the loan contract will include
integrity provisions to ensure that IDB retains its ability to investigate
and sanction the commission of Prohibited Practices in the activities it
finances.

4.24

Environmental and Social Safeguards. The Environmental and Social
Policy Framework 62 and its guidelines 63 will apply to sub-sovereign loans

61

Including aspects such as: its internal controls, its processes for managing potential conflicts of
interest, its due diligence of third parties such as contractors, and its mechanisms to report
irregularities and take operational corrective actions when integrity risks materialize.

62

Environmental and Social Policy Framework (Document GN-2965-23).

63

Guidelines for the Environmental and Social Performance Standards (Document OP-1852-7).

- 24 and guarantees under the pilot 64. The Environmental and Social Review
Procedure, 65 already in place at IDB, will guide safeguard actions
associated with preparation, due diligence, and supervision of all
operations.
4.25

Programming. Operational activities with SNGs under the SFP are
expected to follow the principles of the regular country programming
process. The approval of SFP operations will require prior non-objection
by the government of the member country by way of a specific written
consent, which will be sought early in project preparation, 66 or as part of
the regular country programming process. Sub-sovereign operations
should, over time, be part of country strategic dialogue and be framed in
the thematic priorities outlined in the Country Strategy, complementing,
and building synergies with other sovereign and non-sovereign
guaranteed interventions.

4.26

Credit Risk Management. Working with SNGs entails accepting sociopolitical uncertainties, particularly without a sovereign guarantee.
Complementary to institutional measures highlighted in section V,
credit risk mitigation and management strategies to be pursued under
SFP will comprise (i) conducting periodic credit assessments throughout
the life of the loan, and implementing a system for regular monitoring of
the borrower's financial health and compliance with the loan terms;
(ii) adequate risk identification, allocation and sharing exercises; 67
(iii) development of appropriate financial structures, with adequate debt
repayment sources; and/or (iv) inclusion of financial covenants,
promissory notes, collateral and/or remedial clauses in loan agreements,
as might be deemed appropriate.

4.27

Partnerships and Mobilization. Consistent with IDB’s mandate to enter
into financing partnerships as a way to leverage its resources and
mobilize public and private capital investment, IDB will seek to cofinance
and mobilize resources with public and/or private sector partners. Where
appropriate, to mitigate risks, the Bank will evaluate the use of

64

Excluding operations under the Contingent Credit Facility for Natural Disaster and Public Health
Emergencies and the Immediate Response Facility for Emergencies Caused by Natural and
Unexpected Disasters, which are not part of the scope considered for the SFP.

65

2021. IADB. Environmental and Social Review Procedures. Washington DC.

66

When an operation needs to be processed outside country programming steps, a non-objection
will be sought from central/federal government prior to granting project eligibility. Nonobjection will be requested in writing, and it will comprise both a request for non-objection to
the project and to associated TC. Early engagement with national authorities might include
discussions on an SNG’s compliance with fiscal rules and fiscal responsibility frameworks, debt
sustainability analysis, fiscal transparency, scope of the project and how it integrates with
national government-led initiatives, and proposed capacity strengthening measures, among
others.

67

This could take the form, for example, of risk mitigating instruments like guarantees,
cofinancing or cost-sharing with the client.

- 25 guarantees (political risk and credit enhancement) from partner
financial institutions (see paragraph 2.12). Special efforts will be made to
coordinate with other multilateral and bilateral institutions, both in
terms of mobilizing resources for financing operations, as well as grant
resources.
D.

Pricing Principles and Financial Conditions

4.28

Market-Based Pricing. Grounded on principles of NSG-financed
operations, SFP pricing will be market-based, following a price-discovery
process, with financial terms and conditions defined on a project-byproject basis (please see Table 2 below for generic terms, as a reference).
Therefore, terms and conditions under SFP will differ from those
applicable to sovereign-guaranteed operations.
Table 2: Typical/Indicative Parameters
Parameter

Expected Average Value

Eligible products

Loans, guarantees

Tenor

10-15 years (weighted average life)

Interest rate

To be determined by the market (if available, otherwise
based on risk-adjusted return on capital)

Grace period

3-4 years, but ultimately based on project specifics

Currencies

US$, Local currencies

Typical Value

US$ 20-100 million

Expected SNG Size

Regions, large and intermediate cities

Note: Parameters will vary for each transaction, determined by the market and client preferences. The
parameters shown here are indicative and similar to those of other IFIs’.

4.29

In those cases where market-based pricing for a specific SFP transaction
cannot be directly obtained, IDB will (i) perform price discovery by
comparing with similar sub-sovereign transactions with the same credit
rating, either in that SNG or in similar SNGs in the region, or (ii) apply the
theoretical pricing model (described in paragraph 4.30).

4.30

Theoretical Pricing Model. A theoretical pricing model developed for
the SFP will be applied to each operation with a double purpose:
(i) establishing a price in those cases where there is no market reference;
and (ii) having a reference in those cases where market pricing is
available, to ensure that the pilot deployed by the Bank generates a
reasonable risk-adjusted return on capital. The theoretical pricing for
SFP operations would support the general principles of financial
sustainability embedded in the Bank’s Capital Adequacy Policy (CAP)

- 26 Mandate and Regulations 68 and the Income Management Model 69. SFP
theoretical pricing will be based on a risk-adjusted return on capital
framework that includes: (i) the IDB's base rate; (ii) the Bank’s funding
costs (a function of the loan tenor); (iii) administrative expenses;
(iv) expected losses (a function of the credit rating-based probability of
default and the assumed loss given default of that particular
transaction); (v) cost of required capital (determined on a case by case
basis); and (vi) an estimated spread to allow for capital accumulation to
sustain the growth in the portfolio. The corresponding financial terms
and conditions for investment loans and guarantees (including but not
limited to lending rate, inspection and supervision fees, and grace and
amortization periods, and other relevant financial charges) will be
determined by Management and approved by the Board in the context
of the corresponding individual loan/guarantee proposal. 70 Loans to
eligible SNGs shall benefit from options, as provided by the Flexible
Financing Facility (FFF), to manage interest rate risk and foreign
exchange risk. Specific contractual provisions following those included
in loans under the FFF will be developed and included in corresponding
loan contracts, as the case may be.
E.

Monitoring, Reporting and Evaluation

4.31

SFP M&E Framework. To assist the evaluation of the SFP, a draft M&E
framework has been developed and included in Annex IV. The SFP pilot
will be evaluated against early results associated with the SFP’s vertical
logic – improved SNG’s technical and financial capacities and early
outcomes from investment components – as well as IDB’s ability to
implement the SFP as a lending instrument (as described in paragraph
4.9), its effectiveness and efficacy, to assist eligible SNGs promote
sustainable local and regional development, as they transition to market
financing. 71 Figure 1 in Annex IV presents a sketch of the SFPs vertical
logic, serving as a reference for designing results matrices for individual
projects and providing model indicators. This sketch is illustrative of the
vertical logic of the program as a whole, and the specific wording of
general and specific objectives of individual operations may need to be
adjusted to fit their characteristics. Specific projects should develop an
individual vertical logic and define general and specific objectives that,

68

Documents AB-2994 and AB-2996.

69

Document AB-3044.

70

Consistent with the Risk Taxonomy of the Inter-American Development Bank. (GN-2547) and
operationalized through the SNG Credit Risk Management Framework.

71

The pilot nature of the SFP also limits the scope of evaluation that might be conducted after
5 years given its modest size and period of implementation. As such, areas that are not expected
will be subject to evaluation include (i) portfolio development effectiveness, (ii) handling of
special assets/delinquent portfolio, (iii) impact on economic capital, (iv) income, and (v) overall
impact attainment.

- 27 while consistent with the objectives of the SFP, should be appropriate to
the individual intervention and context. Thus, individual operations will
draw and adapt relevant specific objectives under the SFP, responding
to the particular problems and solutions proposed for the project, while
collectively contributing to the overall results of the program. 72
4.32

SFP Pilot Evaluation. After the fifth year of implementation of the pilot,
OVE will conduct and present to the Board an evaluation of the SFP pilot
as a lending instrument. The evaluation of the SFP program will be
informed by the evaluation of each individual project or, when projects
have not yet been completed, by their intermediate/early outcomes. The
results of OVE’s evaluation will inform ensuing actions associated to the
continuity of the program (e.g. pilot extension or mainstreaming) and/or
adjustments to the SFP. Any new proposal to adjust, continue or
mainstream the SFP would be presented to the Board for consideration.
73

4.33

M&E and Reporting of Individual Operations. SFP individual operations
will follow SG procedures regarding performance monitoring and
evaluation and will comply with IDB’s Development Effectiveness Policy
Framework, including appropriate regulations, guidance documents
and tools issued by Management. SFP individual operations’
performance will be tracked against the achievement of project
objectives, delivery of results, indicators associated with developmental
impact, project performance indicators, compliance with various policies
and mainstreaming of cross-cutting themes. 74 Project completion
reports (PCRs), consistent with the IDB Group’s Evaluation Policy
Framework, will be prepared at project closing applying an objectivesbased approach. To the extent possible PMRs will apply, as in the case of
SG operations. Consistent with Bank policy, a PCR is required for each
completed lending operation that is approved with a Development
Effectiveness Matrix. 75 In addition, for sub sovereign operations, IDB will
establish new arrangements to monitor the use of proceeds, debt
payment and credit risk, updating ratings, and establishing an

72

Although incorporating all 3 specific objectives might not always be required, it is anticipated
that 2 or more might frequently be used/adapted for a project.

73

The pilot will generate knowledge and allow IDB to evaluate demand, impact, and performance
of the SFP based on the parameters outlined in paragraph 4.9 and further developed in Annex
IV. In addition, in considering any possible extension of the pilot, mainstreaming or scale up, an
analysis of complementary elements – such as capital consumption, risk appetite, and broad
and equitable access – and their impact on IDB should be taken into account.

74

At the time of presenting this paper, performance monitoring systems included Progress
Monitoring Reports (PMR) and safeguards monitoring reports.

75

Subnational operations should be evaluated considering the scope with which they are
approved. PCR guidelines (OP-1696-6, as amended) apply noting that the scope of subnational
operations refers to local development problems and objectives, as opposed to a country wide
approach.

- 28 associated portfolio early warning system. To effectively measure the
success of the pilot, SFP operations will also incorporate in their
respective results matrixes, indicators captured in the SFP Pilot M&E
Framework.
4.34

Other Monitoring and Reporting. During the implementation of the
pilot and the program, IDB will continuously monitor and report on loan
portfolio performance, fiduciary, environmental and social risk
management performance, thereby ensuring the identification of
technical assistance needs or the need to implement correction or risk
mitigation actions. In addition, a mid-term report with a summary of the
progress, products, results achieved, and lessons derived from
operations under the SFP will be prepared in the third year of
implementation and shared with the Board for information. As
appropriate, some of these findings and lessons learned could also be
included in other IDB Group reports such as the Development
Effectiveness Overview, the quarterly risk report and/or biannual
portfolio review. Moreover, as part of the financial planning exercise,
allocations for individual sub-sovereign operations will be captured in
IDB’s annual Long-Term Financial Projections document presented to
the Board.

F.

Supporting Impact + under a Synergistic Approach

4.35

IDB and IDB-Invest synergies will focus on product, process, and
client opportunities. To expedite the development of new subsovereign products (loans, guarantees) and associated processes to
structure, approve, monitor, and manage a new portfolio of subsovereign operations, IDB will require new and complementary skills in
several areas (e.g., banking, risk, resource mobilization, legal etc.). IDBInvest’s robust experience with NSG finance provides space for IDB’s
cross-learning, skills development and, where appropriate, service
sharing. In order to accelerate the learning process, as part of the SFP
pilot (and building on emerging successful experiences with the
sovereign portfolio) the SFP will seek to: (i) integrate the support of IDBInvest in IDB’s project teams 76 and advisory role in some committees,
(ii) request IDB-Invest to appoint consultative focal points, 77 and
(iii) implement early service level agreements with IDB-Invest for specific

76

As part of the pilot, sub-sovereign operations could include the support of a team member from
IDB Invest who, from early on in the process, would advise on (i) potential private sector
displacement resulting from a sub-sovereign transaction (para 4.4 above), (ii) opportunities for
complementary private sector financing, and (iii) latent financial and risk tolerance and possible
mitigation structures, among others. Upon approval, a team member from IDB Invest’s portfolio
maintenance unit could support IDB teams in the supervision of the operation, highlighting any
perceived warning signs.

77

Consultative focal points in IDB-Invest may serve as the main contact for coordination and
exchange of information with the IDB (e.g. on operational aspects, finance, credit risk, portfolio
management, etc.), channeling information and facilitating involvement.

- 29 functions (e.g. in areas such as special assets recovery) 78 where costeffectiveness and/or expertise justifies it.
4.36

IDB-Group upstream assessments can generate synergies at client
level. Firstly, IDB’s knowledge and established relationship with public
sector entities can prove strategic not only in developing demand and
conditions for sub-sovereign lending to SNGs but also, as part of an
increased value proposition of the IDB Group, support subnational SOE’s
transition to market borrowing through IDB-Invest. 79 For this purpose,
upstream programmatic multisectoral urban/territorial diagnostic
studies, jointly prepared by IDB and IDB-Invest staff, will provide
quantitative and qualitative assessments highlighting the strengths and
weaknesses of SNGs and subnational SOEs charged with the delivery of
services at city/reginal level, identify opportunities for investment at nonsovereign level, and define local and corporate reforms for
implementation. Secondly, with a view to gradually transition SNGs from
public to private sector borrowing (particularly from domestic capital
markets), an early assessment of subnational debt markets will be
conducted in selected countries highlighting commercial banks’
barriers to SNG lending, possible reforms (e.g., regulatory, corporate
governance, credit risk etc.) and opportunities for gradual commercial
cofinancing.

G.

Organizational Arrangements

4.37

To operationalize the SFP, new skills or increased capacity might be
required over time in areas such as credit risk assessment, loan
structuring and loan monitoring, risk management, legal, integrity,
and/or resource mobilization and pricing, among others. This will be
secured through a mix of new recruitment, training of existing staff,
consultancies, and/or service level agreements between IDB and IDB
Invest and will be calibrated based on evolving needs and increasing
lending volumes. 80 Existing organizational divisions/units will be

78

Specific areas where service level agreements will be defined as part of the pilot implementation
and are likely to evolve as skills develop and/or/if volumes increase.

79

Please refer to footnote 23 for details on NSG division of responsibilities under the Busan
Resolution.

80

A more detailed strategy forecasts that for the first 18 months of implementation of the pilot,
additional skills will be secured primarily through consultancies (resources are already captured
under M&E resources in paragraph 4.12) and service level agreements with IDB Invest (e.g.
recovery functions). In parallel, transfer of skills on NSG products will also occur through
collaboration with IDB Invest and the use of consultative focal points (see paragraph 4.35).
Thereafter, as lending volume and structuring complexity increases and execution
responsibilities are underway, complementary staff will be necessary (a very preliminary
assessment suggests the need for 7-8 new staff). Aside from skill transfer strategies with IDB
Invest already outlined, an interdepartmental community of practice for Sub-sovereign Finance
will be established (evolving from the existing working group of the same name) to accelerate
learning and collaboration and exchange experiences.

- 30 expected to deliver results under the pilot, supported by a SFP
coordination and monitoring team. Preliminary budget details are in
Annex V.

V.

RISK MANAGEMENT

A.

Moral Hazard

5.1

Uncontrolled access to credit by SNGs and expectations of financial
support may result in unsustainable subnational debt, which in turn
puts pressure for bailouts from the central government – the moral
hazard concern. The problem of moral hazard and the expectation of a
bailout from the central government in an event of subnational fiscal
insolvency, can be partly mitigated through the implementation of
subnational fiscal responsibility frameworks and fiscal rules, the
development of ex ante alerts providing timely early warnings of
emergent fiscal risks, improved transparency and accountability
mechanisms at subnational level, and the development of management
capacities commensurate with SNG responsibilities.

5.2

In this regard, the SFP seeks to improve subnational fiscal autonomy,
including the crucial dimension of avoiding bailouts. For this, a key
component will entail fiscal strengthening of the pilot SNGs to improve
their creditworthiness. Separately, technical assistance might also be
offered to the central government to improve subnational fiscal
monitoring and to strengthen intergovernmental relations, in
dimensions such as improvement of subnational own resources,
transparency and predictability of transfers, and subnational debt
regulation (including bankruptcy procedures for subnational insolvency
cases).

5.3

Also, consistent with recommendations of earlier external advisory
group’s recommendations (paragraph 3.1, document GN-2125-5), to
prevent moral hazard, the following will be observed (i) strict adherence
to central government policies and fiscal discipline; (ii) compliance with
objective indicators of financial condition; and (iii) strengthened SNG’s
risk management frameworks.

B.

* ***

5.4

* 81.

5.5

*

81

*

- 31 5.6

*

5.7

*

5.8

* 82, 83.

5.9

*

5.10

*

C.

Integrity and Fiduciary Risk

5.11

Integrity risk and its associated reputational impact. Past occurrences
of prohibited practices, unethical or financial misconduct or institutional
weaknesses could adversely affect the projects’ ability to achieve
objectives to the Bank’s reputation. To mitigate these potential effects,
as described in paragraph 4.22 above, the Bank will review subnational
entities and their capacity to manage integrity risks, and formulate a
plan to strengthen their systems, put in place controls or take corrective
measures.

5.12

Portfolio, fiduciary, and environmental and social risk management.
Concerns over ESG risks could arise as IDB engages at subnational level.
To prevent such risks, SFP operations will be subject to quality assurance
and risk review throughout the project preparation phase and portfolio
monitoring and reporting during the execution phase. Quality assurance
and risk review will ensure adequate risk identification, assessment, and
mitigation in line with socioenvironmental standards and fiduciary
principles. Portfolio monitoring and reporting will support the
identification of technical assistance needs to strengthen SNGs capacity,
ensure timely response to potential negative socioenvironmental
impacts, and provide portfolio alerts and exposure to high risks.

VI.
6.1

RECOMMENDATION

Based on the analysis and information provided in this document,
Management recommends that the Board of Executive Directors of the
IDB approves the proposed resolution attached to this document as
Appendix I. The approval of the proposed resolution would represent the
adoption of the following recommendations:
a.

82

*

83

*

Recommendation 1: To establish the “Sub-Sovereign Finance
Program (SFP)” as a pilot program of the IDB in accordance with

- 32 the terms and conditions set forth in Sections IV and V of this
document.
b.

Recommendation 2: That up to the amount of US$1,000,000,000
from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital resources will be allocated under
Subprogram 1 of the SFP for the financing of individual loan and
guarantee operations.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex I

ANNEX I. * ***

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex II
Page 1 of 4

ANNEX II. FISCAL AND FINANCIAL CONDITION OF LAC SNGS
A PRELIMINARY CREDITWORTHINESS ANALYSIS 1
1.1

The IDB Group Institutional Strategy, “Transforming for Scale and Impact,” focuses
on subnational entities as a key area for growth, shifting from Sovereign Guarantee
to Non-Sovereign Guarantee financing to encourage better creditworthiness and
fiscal autonomy.

1.2

To support this goal, we developed a preliminary selection guideline aimed at
identifying SNG with the highest potential to receive IDB’s non-sovereign financing,
based on criteria that considers legal capacity; size; and intergovernmental
arrangements and fiscal conditions (see below). It is important to note that this list
is not exhaustive: Other SNG could also be considered. Moreover, this assessment is
only preliminary and an in-depth fiscal sustainability analysis of each SNG should be
conducted before committing to further credit consideration. Parameters used for
this preliminary analysis include:
a.

Legal capacity: Can SNG borrow with international organizations without
sovereign guarantee? With support from IDB’s Legal Department, an analysis
of legal frameworks was conducted (Annex III), resulting in 19 countries in
which SNG can borrow with international organizations without sovereign
guarantee.

b.

Size: A sample of the largest intermediate subnational governments (states,
provinces, departments, among others) and cities, with an indicative
population size above 500,000 inhabitants (with exceptions, based on
characteristics of subnational governments such as fiscal autonomy and
GDP/capita) has been identified. Population size tends to be correlated with
institutional capacity and ability to acquire sizable loans.

c.

Intergovernmental arrangements and fiscal conditions: The analysis covered
key aspects of SNG finances including: (i) previous experience in credit
markets and ratings provided by at least one of the main credit rating
agencies (Moody’s, Standard & Poors, Fitch); (ii) compliance with subnational
fiscal rules (in the cases of Brazil and Colombia); (iii) estimation, where
available, of metrics typically used in creditworthiness analysis, over the
previous five years, including: (a) own revenue over total revenue; (b) financial
debt over total revenues; (c) non-financial liabilities over total revenues;
(d) interest payment over total revenues; (e) fiscal balance over total income;
and (f) operating balance over operating revenues.

1.3

Following this analysis, 63 SNG in eight countries with most potential to become
beneficiaries of the initiative were preliminary identified.

1.4

Argentina (10 Provincial governments / 5 Municipalities)Provincial governments,
along with a select group of municipalities, are considered viable candidates. Most
subnational tax bases (including consumption, property, and vehicle taxes) belong

1

This analysis is based on available public information, IDB’s Outlook of fiscal relations among levels of
governments in LAC; and IDB’s subnational fiscal platform.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex II
Page 2 of 4

to the provincial level, making this level of government the most suitable to access
financing in Argentina.
1.5

Brazil (5 States / 22 Municipalities)Brazilian’s states and municipalities have strong
potential for credit operations due to their size, along with significant and diverse
revenue sources. Many states and large municipalities exhibit solid fiscal
management, despite challenges related to expenditure rigidity (especially for the
state level). Brazil also has a strong subnational fiscal responsibility framework
(CAPAG system), along with an objective, formula-based system of subnational
project prioritization (COFIEX), based on the quality of project formulation and
alignment with national priorities.

1.6

Colombia (3 Departments / 6 Municipalities)Departments and municipalities are
well-positioned for financing due to a solid legal framework, relatively large
population (in the case of municipalities), and robust fiscal oversight, based on the
subnational fiscal responsibility framework known as the “traffic light system”
administered by the Fiscal Affairs Directorate of the Ministry of Finance.
Departments mainly rely on indirect taxes, while municipalities generate significant
revenue from property and business taxes.

1.7

Costa Rica(1 Municipality)Costa Rican municipalities have considerable fiscal
autonomy, with most revenues derived from local taxes such as property and
consumption taxes. They generally manage their finances prudently, with a focus on
maintaining fiscal discipline. San Jose, as the capital whose larger metropolitan area
concentrates more than half of the country’s population, has shown low financial
debt in recent years.

1.8

Ecuador (5 Municipalities)Ecuador has some large municipal governments with
creditworthiness potential, although in general SNG face fiscal transparency
challenges, as key cities like Quito, Guayaquil, Cuenca, Santo Domingo, and Manta
do not publish comprehensive financial data, including series with their fiscal result
and debt; this information is also not published by the central government.

1.9

Guatemala (1 Municipality)Guatemalan municipalities have high dependence on
intergovernmental transfers, which make up a large portion of their revenues.
Guatemala City, the country’s largest municipality, has creditworthiness potential.
The country’s Ministry of Finance regularly publishes information on SNG public
finances, including a municipal financial index.

1.10

Panamá (1 Municipality)Panama’s municipalities have limited fiscal autonomy, with
most local revenue coming from transfers from the central government (including
from the property tax, which is centrally collected and redistributed among
municipalities). They generate own income through taxes on commercial activities,
fees, and contributions for services provided. Panama City’s metropolitan area
comprises around half of the country’s population, with the municipality of Panama
City having creditworthiness potential. There is no publicly available information on
SNG executed budget and/or debt.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex II
Page 3 of 4

1.11

Uruguay (4 Departments)Uruguay’s departments have relatively high fiscal
autonomy, with most of their revenues coming from own-source taxes like property
and vehicle taxes. Due to their size and autonomy, the largest departments have
creditworthiness potential. Departments regularly publish their budgetary
execution, although data on their debt is limited.
TABLE II-1. List of 63 SNGS candidates under analysis

COUNTRY

ARGENTINA

BRAZIL

SNG

LEVEL

SIZE

Buenos Aires

Intermediate

17,523,996

Córdoba

Intermediate

3,840,905

Santa Fe

Intermediate

3,544,908

Mendoza

Intermediate

2,043,540

Salta

Intermediate

1,441,351

Entre Ríos

Intermediate

1,425,578

Misiones

Intermediate

1,278,873

Corrientes

Intermediate

1,212,696

Chaco

Intermediate

1,129,606

Neuquén

Intermediate

726,590

Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires

Large city

3,121,707

Córdoba

Large city

1,505,250

Rosario

Large city

1,348,725

Neuquén

Large city

231,198

Mendoza

Large city

127,160

Bahia

Intermediate

14,141,626

Paraíba

Intermediate

3,974,687

Espírito Santo

Intermediate

3,833,712

Mato Grosso

Intermediate

3,658,649

Rondônia

Intermediate

1,581,196

São Paulo

Large city

11,451,999

Salvador

Large city

2,417,678

Belo Horizonte

Large city

2,315,560

Curitiba

Large city

1,773,718

Goiânia

Large city

1,437,366

Porto Alegre

Large city

1,332,845

Belém

Large city

1,303,403

São Luís

Large city

1,037,775

Maceió

Large city

957,916

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex II
Page 4 of 4

TABLE II-1. List of 63 SNGS candidates under analysis
COUNTRY

SNG

LEVEL

João Pessoa

Large city

833,932

Ribeirão Preto

Large city

720,116

Jaboatão dos Guararapes

Large city

711,330

Contagem

Large city

673,849

Aracaju

Large city

602,757

Juiz de For a

Large city

577,532

Ananindeua

Large city

540,410

Serra

Large city

536,765

Caxias do Sul

Large city

523,716

Niterói

Large city

516,981

Campos dos Goytacazes

Large city

514,643

Vila Velha

Large city

508,655

Porto Velho

Large city

460,434

Antioquia

Intermediate

6,995,000

Valle del Cauca

Intermediate

3,789,874

Cundinamarca

Intermediate

2,792,877

Bogota, D.C.

Large city

7,181,469

Medellín

Large city

2,700,702

Cali

Large city

1,822,871

Cartagena

Large city

973,045

Bucaramanga

Large city

581,130

Pereira

Large city

481,768

San Jose

Large city

356,056

Guayaquil

Large city

2,650,288

Quito

Large city

1,763,275

Cuenca

Large city

596,101

Santo Domingo

Large city

334,826

Manta

Large city

258,697

GUATEMALA

Guatemala City

Large city

923,392

PANAMA

Panama City

Large city

880,691

Montevideo

Intermediate

1,319,108

Canelones

Intermediate

520,187

Maldonado

Intermediate

164,300

Colonia

Intermediate

123,203

BRAZIL

COLOMBIA

COSTA RICA

ECUADOR

URUGUAY

Source: Project Team Analysis. For further information, see preliminary analysis for each SNG

SIZE

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex III
Page 1 of 5

ANNEX III. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CONTRACTING OF
EXTERNAL LOANS BY SUBNATIONAL GOVERNMENTS IN LAC – A PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS 1
1.1

The requirements for contracting and obtaining external financing vary
depending on the legislation of the countries in the region. Some legal
frameworks allow SNGs to borrow with local authorization, while others require
authorization from the national government and/or legislative authorization at
the national level. In some cases, legislations preclude SNGs from borrowing
from external sources of financing. Table III-1 below provides an indicative and
preliminary information about the requirements concerning SNGs borrowing
without sovereign guarantee.
Table III-1: Requirements for the contracting of
external loans by SNGs
Able to Borrow without
National Approvals
Costa Rica
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Uruguay

Notes:

1

Able to Borrow with
National Approval
Argentinab
Boliviaa, b
Belize b
Brazila
Chilea, b
Colombiab
Dominican Republicb
Ecuadorb
El Salvadora
Guatemalab
Guyanab
Hondurasa, b
Jamaicab
Panamab
Trinidad and Tobagob

Not allowed to Borrow
from External Sources
Bahamas
Barbados
Haiti
México
Peruc
Suriname
Venezuela

a. Requires prior legislative approval at national level
b. Requires prior approval by the national executive power
c. Requires the sovereign guarantee

This summary is based on information available online, however, it does not constitute a definitive,
comprehensive, or all-encompassing analysis of the legislation or its practical application.
Information pertaining to Barbados is not included as the country does not have subnational
governments. The term “subnational governments” refers to local or regional governments, such as
provinces, departments, states, and municipalities, depending on a country's political subdivision.
Proposals for individual operations will require a case-by-case legal due diligence. State owned
enterprises and decentralized institutions are not comprised in this summary.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex III
Page 2 of 5

1.2

Argentina. According to the Argentine legislation “In order to access borrowing
operations and grant guarantees and endorsements, the governments of the
provinces, the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, and of the municipalities shall
submit the background information and the corresponding documentation to
the Ministry of the Interior, which, together with the Ministry of Economy, shall
carry out an analysis in order to authorize such operations….”. In the case of
municipal borrowing, “…the provinces shall coordinate with the national
government and with their respective municipalities the actions aimed to
promote such authorizations.”

1.3

Bahamas. According to its legislation, subnational governments in Bahamas
do not have the power to borrow, and they are provided funding by the central
Government.

1.4

Belize. In accordance with the legislation on towns councils, “Whenever the
general interest and welfare or development of any town will, in the opinion of
two-thirds of the members of the Council, be advanced by an expenditure
greater than can be met out of the annual revenue of the Town Fund, the
Council of that town may, by resolution carried by its majority, recommend to
the Minister for the time being responsible for Finance, on the guarantee of an
annual allocation of such amount of the Town Fund as may be equivalent to
the annual interest and sinking fund necessary for its redemption, the raising
of a loan, the proceeds of which shall be devoted to such development.”

1.5

Bolivia. Pursuant to the Bolivian legislation “The resources of the municipal
autonomous territorial entities are: […] 5. Internal and external credits and loans
contracted in accordance with the legislation of the central level of the State”
and “The contracting of external public debt must be authorized by law of the
Plurinational Legislative Assembly.”

1.6

Brazil. In accordance with Brazilian legislation the states, the Federal District, and the
municipalities may contract external credit operations, and the “…Ministry of Finance
will verify compliance with the limits and conditions relating to the carrying out of
credit operations by each entity of the Federation….”, including the “existence of prior
and express authorization for contracting, in the text of the budget law, in additional
credits or specific law”, and the “…specific authorization from the Federal Senate.”

1.7

Chile. According to the Constitution, "Only the following are matters of law:
[...] 7) Those that authorize the State, its agencies and municipalities to contract
loans, which must be intended to finance specific projects. [...]"; and "8) Those
that authorize the celebration of any kind of operations that may directly or
indirectly compromise the credit or financial responsibility of the State, its
agencies and municipalities."

1.8

Colombia. As stated in its Constitution, Colombian “Territorial entities may
issue public debt securities and bonds, subject to the conditions of the financial
market, and also contract external credit, all in accordance with the law that
regulates the matter.” In addition, under Colombia legislation “…the execution of

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex III
Page 3 of 5

external public credit operations [...] by: i) territorial entities [...], will require
authorization issued by resolution by the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.”
1.9

Costa Rica. According to the national Constitution: “The law shall indicate in
which cases municipalities will need legislative authorization to contract loans,
pledge their assets or income, or sell properties or real estate property.”
Likewise, according to the law the “Municipalities and any forms of association
between them may enter into all kinds of loans. Loans will require the approval
of at least two-thirds of all members of the respective Municipal Council.”

1.10

Ecuador. Pursuant to the Ecuadorian Constitution “The contracting of public
debt at all levels of the State will be governed by the guidelines of the respective
planning and budget and will be authorized by a debt and financing
committee …”. Likewise, in accordance with the legislation, “Each entity of the
public sector that has the status of a legal entity under public law, with the prior
authorization of the Debt and Financing Committee, may make a definitive
decision on the corresponding indebtedness, and shall assume responsibility
for ensuring that the respective indebtedness and the stipulations of inherent
contracts or agreements do not affect the sovereignty of the Republic of
Ecuador.”

1.11

El Salvador. According to the laws of El Salvador "…the contracting of loans with
national or foreign institutions that do not require state guarantee, will require
the approval of the council with the vote of three-quarters of its members. The
contracting of loans with foreign institutions with state guarantee, will in
addition require the authorization and approval of the legislative assembly".

1.12

Guatemala. Under the legislation of Guatemala “In order to achieve their
purposes, municipalities may contract loans in compliance with the legal
requirements established for such purpose. They must carefully observe the
principle of payment capacity so as not to affect municipal finances and ensure
that the debt they incur does not affect or compromise national public finances.
Municipalities may contract credit obligations whose repayment period
exceeds the term of government of the Municipal Council that contracts them,
provided that they are based on the conclusions and recommendations of the
technical feasibility studies prepared for such purpose.” Likewise, “External
loans […] must be channeled by the Ministry of Public Finance and be subject
to the debt policy established by the State for the public sector.”

1.13

Guyana. Pursuant to the legislation on local government, “The local authority
of a village or country district may, with the sanction of the Minister, borrow any
sum of money required for the purpose of the district and may pledge the
security of the rates and of the property generally of the local authority for the
repayment of the loan together with interest.”

1.14

Haiti. Pursuant to the constitution, the President of the Republic “…negotiates
and signs all international treaties, conventions and agreements and submits
them to the ratification of the National Assembly.”

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex III
Page 4 of 5

1.15

Honduras: According to the Honduran law, “Municipalities may contract loans
and carry out other financial operations with any national institution, preferably
a state institution. When loans are made with foreign entities, the procedures
established in the Public Credit Law will be followed.” Likewise, the legislation
establishes: “No public sector entity may initiate procedures to carry out
external public credit operations without the written authorization of the
Secretary of State in the Finance Office. The provisions of this article shall also
apply to municipalities...…”and “…[external debt] contracts shall be subject to
approval by the President of the Republic and their signing must be authorized
by the National Congress.”

1.16

Jamaica. Pursuant to Jamaican law “…a Local Authority [Municipalities] may,
with the approval of the Ministry responsible for finance, borrow any sums
required by it for meeting its obligations or discharging any of its functions.”

1.17

México. According to the Constitution, the States may not in any case "…directly
or indirectly contract obligations or loans with governments of other nations,
with foreign companies or individuals, or when they must be paid in foreign
currency or outside the national territory." Similarly, the law on Financial
Discipline of Federal Entities and Municipalities establishes that “Public Entities
may not contract, directly or indirectly, Financing or Obligations with
governments of other nations, with foreign companies or individuals, nor when
they must be paid in foreign currency or outside the national territory.”

1.18

Nicaragua. In accordance with the laws of Nicaragua “Public sector institutions
may contract public credit operations with guarantee or collateral on national
or municipal assets or revenue in accordance with current legal norms and
regulations.” Likewise, according to the legislation “Municipal governments
may request and obtain short- and medium-term loans from public or private
banks for the execution of works and for the provision and improvement of
public services derived from their powers, duly approved by the respective
Municipal Councils, in accordance with their Development Plans. The
Municipality may guarantee these loans with up to 50% of its budgeted
investment expenses, and with its personal movable and immovable property.”

1.19

Panamá. Pursuant to the Constitution of Panama, “The Municipalities may
contract loans with prior authorization from the Executive Branch.”

1.20

Paraguay. According to the legislation of Paraguay, “The indebtedness resulting
from the public credit operations of the municipalities shall be called “municipal
public debt” and may arise from: […] contracting of loans with financial
institutions.” In addition, pursuant to the law “Loan contracts shall be valid and
enforceable only if approved by the respective municipal legislature.”

1.21

Perú. According to the Peruvian legislation, “The external debt operations
entered into by regional government or local governments may only be
entered into with the guarantee from the national government….”

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex III
Page 5 of 5

1.22

República Dominicana. Pursuant to the law of the Dominican Republic “…the
municipalities may, in accordance with the provisions of the current Public
Credit Law, enter into credit operations in all their modalities, both short,
medium and long term, for the financing of their investments, as well as for the
total or partial replacement of pre-existing operations.” In addition, the law
states that “Before starting any process aimed at entering into public credit
operations [….], the public bodies […] must request, through the General
Directorate of Public Credit, the prior approval of the Secretary of State for
Finance, who will decide on its suitability within the framework of the national
policy and strategy on debt matters defined by the Public Debt Council.”

1.23

Suriname. According to the constitution the “Conditions for the manner in
which the State obtains loans shall be regulated by law.”

1.24

Trinidad y Tobago. In accordance with the Municipal Corporations Act “A
Corporation may apply to the Minister for approval to borrow such sums of
money as it considers necessary for the execution of any permanent works or
of any works which it is authorized to execute under this Act or any other
written law or for the repayment of any loan or part thereof or for any purpose…”.

1.25

Uruguay. As stated in its Constitution, “Departmental Governments may not
issue departmental public debt securities, nor arrange loans or borrowings with
international organizations or foreign institutions or governments, except at
the proposal of the Mayor, approved by the Departmental Board, following a
report from the audit tribunal and with the consent of the Legislative Branch,
granted by an absolute majority of the total members of the General Assembly,
in a meeting of both Chambers.”

1.26

Venezuela. Pursuant to the laws of Venezuela “… states, districts and municipalities,
and the entities created by them, may not carry out external public credit operations,
neither in foreign currency, nor guarantee third party obligations.”

Source: Project Team Analysis.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex IV
Page 1 of 5

ANNEX IV. EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
1.1

This annex outlines the theory of change of the Sub-sovereign Finance Program (SFP) and
discusses the main elements of the proposed evaluation, including the main evaluation
questions and proposed methodology.
A.

Theory of Change

1.2

The general objective of the SFP is to assist eligible SNGs promote sustainable regions and
local development by improving access to market financing. The specific objectives of the
SFP are (i) to strengthen SNGs fiscal and financial management, (ii) to strengthen SNG’s
capacities to structure and implement project pipelines, and (iii) to improve service delivery
and infrastructure at the subnational level.

1.3

The three specific objectives are connected. Improving access to market financing requires
SNGs to develop institutional capabilities to plan, structure and implement new investment
projects (through improved sectoral governance, procurement practices, project planning
and management, regulatory and risk management, among others). This will be attended
to through Specific Objective 2. In turn, better fiscal and financial management capacity is
essential to increase own revenue, enhance credit ratings to access debt, and manage debt
repayment of large-scale investments. This will be addressed through Specific Objective 1.
These 2 objectives will be complemented through the hands-on experience gained
executing investment projects, which will involve learning by doing, will have
demonstrational and multiplier effects, and in addition to increasing capacity, will achieve
service delivery. Achieving the third specific objective is also expected to (i) help establish
the minimum infrastructure/service delivery levels needed to address private sector
concerns (e.g. economic viability, minimum regulatory standards, etc.) – particularly in those
cases where service gaps are significant, or project profiles show a high risk or a low return–
making SNGs more attractive to subsequent private sector investment and/or (ii) enable
private sector financing (either in the case of a PPP or through attracting commercial
cofinancing). Figure 1 below presents the vertical logic leading to the program objective as
well as indicative outcome and intermediate outcome indicators. These indicators are
illustrative. Individual operations approved under the SFP will contribute to the overall
achievement of the program’s objectives.

1.4

Figure 1 in Annex IV presents a general sketch of the Program's vertical logic, serving as a
reference for designing results matrices for individual projects. This sketch is illustrative;
therefore, the vertical logic, including the wording of the General and Specific Objectives,
may not be directly relevant to/appropriately reflect the characteristics of a given project.
Consequently, individual projects should develop individual vertical logic frameworks and
define general and specific objectives that, while consistent with the General Objective of
the SFP, are appropriate to the intervention and context.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex IV
Page 2 of 5

1.5

Figure 1 contains a summary of potential outcome indicators for the SFP, identifying some
early outcome indicators which will serve to evaluate the pilot. 1 These outcome- and early
outcome- indicators are divided by specific objective. In support of SFP Specific Objectives
1 and 2, a set of indicative outcome indicators are presented to enhance financial and
technical institutional capacity of the SNGs, which will need to be tailored to each SNG
specific challenges and proposed solutions. Similarly, a set of service delivery and access to
infrastructure indicators will measure the outcomes obtained through the outputs related
to closing the investment gap. Depending on the nature of the ensuing individual projects,
indicators can be selected from the menu of SFP indicators (as well as other project-specific
sector indicators) and adapted, as appropriate. 2 The type of the indicator will depend on the
sector and specific nature of the Bank intervention and will need to be adapted from
program to project (as a sole SNG will be targeted). Given the limited number of operations
that will be implemented under the pilot, the aggregate value of each outcome indicator
might be modest, thus the focus should lay on their transformational contribution to
specific objectives.

1

These indicators are illustrative (given the broad variety of projects that might be implemented) and have been
selected to guide project teams.

2

The illustrative Outcome Indicators that are measured in terms of the number of SNGs, should be adopted for
evaluation at the Program level. SMART outcome indicators should be specified for individual projects according to
their Objectives and interventions. When defining these outcome indicators at the individual project level,
consideration should be given to reflecting the effective use of the products delivered by each project. Whenever
possible, indicators from the Indicators Catalog should be used.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex IV
Page 3 of 5

Figure 1
Determinants

Weak ﬁscal and ﬁnancial capacities and
creditworthiness

Weak capacity to structure and execute projects
attracting private sector ﬁnance

Insufﬁcient SNG investments to implement
existing mandates

General Problem

Insufﬁcient access to private sector ﬁnance to develop subnational territories

General
Objective

Assist eligible SNGs promote sustainable territorial regions and local development by improving access to market ﬁnancing

Speciﬁc
Objectives

Illustrative
Outcome
Indicators*

Strengthen SNGs capacities to take and
manage debt

Own revenue growth: # SNGs with
updated revenue systems and/or
implementing land-based
instruments/tariffs linked to project
development.
Public ﬁnancial management: # SNGs
with updated PFM systems.
Debt management: # SNGs with
updated debt management strategies.

Strengthen SNGs capacities to develop and
implement project pipelines

Planning: # SNGs with updated land use plans.

Quality: # SNGs with improved services.

Sector Governance: # SNGs with sectoral plans (+
investment).

Access: # SNGs with increased service coverage

Capital Budget: # SNGs with annual budgeted
capital for infrastructure and services.
Cost performance: # SNGs with improved
monitoring & evaluation systems to ensure
projects are on-track with the allocated budget
Fiduciary: # SNGs with improved
procurement/ﬁduciary systems.

Local autonomy: # SNGs with improved
revenue autonomy (Own revenue/Total
revenue).
Early Outcome
Indicators**

Fiscal transparency: # SNGs with timely
and complete reporting of budget
execution and debt strategy.
Financing conditions: # SNGs with
enhanced credit ratings.

*
**

Indicators should be selected as applicable to each project
These indicators will support the evaluation of the SFP pilot

Improve service delivery and infrastructure at
subnational level

Resilience: # SNGs with reduced incidence of
disaster damage (e.g ﬂooding).
Pollution and emissions: # SNGs with reduced
emissions.
Private Sector Participation: # SNGs
incorporating private sector participation in
capital investment plans.

Investment project management: # SNGs with
project pipelines evaluated ex-ante for potential
capital investment (technical and ﬁnancial
feasibility, market demand, etc.) / # SNGs with
improved capital expenditure.

Investment: # SNGs investing in service delivery
or infrastructure through sub-sovereign ﬁnance.

Regulatory compliance: # SNGs with pipelines
screened for compliance with regulations and
standards.

Private Sector Participation: # SNGs
conducting surveys/interviews with private
sector to gauge interest/barriers to
participation/# SNGs engaging in PPPs or
commercial coﬁnancing.

Risk management: # SNGs with effective
strategies to mitigate risks (e.g. political,
economic, and operational).

Quality of Work: # SNGs that assess adherence
to quality standards and speciﬁcations.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex IV
Page 4 of 5

B.

Evaluation Strategy

1.6

The SFP pilot will be evaluated after the conclusion of its 5th year of
implementation, when 8-10 projects are expected will have been approved,
and their implementation will be underway.

1.7

Evaluation Questions. The evaluation will be organized around the standard
OECD DAC evaluation criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and
sustainability. The questions will cover both (i) early outcomes of the individual
operations approved under the SFP and (ii) the SFP as a mechanism, and the
extent to which it proves a feasible and scalable mechanism for the IDB. 3
a.

Relevance
i.

Mechanism. To which extent was the SFP Pilot designed to
demonstrate the feasibility of intervening at the subnational level
without SG?

ii. Individual Operations. To which extent each individual operation
approved under the SFP was relevant to address the financial and
technical capacity challenges faced by the SNGs? To which extent
each individual operation approved under the SFP was relevant to
improving service delivery?
b.

Effectiveness
Effectiveness will be measured through the early outcomes 4 contained
in Figure 1 which are the ones expected to be achieved by the time of the
evaluation.
i.

Mechanism. To which extent has the SFP Pilot established the
feasibility of intervening at the subnational level without SG?
Specifically, to which extent has the program generated a portfolio
of NSG operations with an acceptable level of operational and credit
risk? To which extent is the SFP financially feasible as a long-term
intervention strategy for the IDB? To which extent has the SFP
succeeded in promoting the transition of SNGs to market financing?

3

As highlighted in the main text of the document, the pilot should generate evidence needed to
evaluate (i) the SFP as an instrument – e.g. the potential market for SFP and demand for this product,
new procedures for processing and supervision, new systems and institutional arrangements,
personnel strength and (ii) early outcomes from the use of the instrument, outlining its potential for
growth and/or challenges encountered. 1.1 The outline vertical logic (figure 1) will guide the
evaluation of outcomes and can serve as a general guide in the design of individual operations, with
objectives defined responding to project context. Selected sample indicators might also be adopted,
as appropriate.

4

Considering that these early outcomes are not SMART outcome indicators to assess the effectiveness
of the individual project at closure, they will not be considered in the Results’ Matrix but will be
included in specific Table in the individual operation´s Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL)
Annex.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex IV
Page 5 of 5

ii. Individual Operations. To which extent did each individual
operation approved under the SFP achieve its objectives in terms of
increasing financial and technical capabilities of SNGs? To which
extent each individual operation approved under the SFP was
relevant to improving service delivery?
c.

Efficiency
i.

Mechanism. To which extent has the pilot been efficient at
achieving its intended outcomes? To which extent were the costs of
NSG loan preparation and implementation in line with comparators
and compatible with the income generated from the operations?

ii. Individual Operations. To which extent have the individual
operations been implemented in a cost-efficient manner?
d.

Sustainability
i.

Mechanism. To which extent do the operational efficiency and
process indicators of the pilot make SFP a scalable long-term option
for IDB intervention? What lessons can be compiled across pilot
projects to benefit expansion of the pilot?

ii. Individual operations. To which extent are the outcomes achieved
by SFP operations (early outcomes) likely to be maintained in the
future?
1.8

Methodology. The evaluation will use a combination of data collection and
analysis methods to deliver its findings. The data will include portfolio
information, internal Bank systems (cost, income, procedures), IDBG strategy
and operational documents. Interviews and surveys with the stakeholders will
be used to complement and triangulate information. The evaluation will also
benchmark the SFP against comparable programs and individual operations
in other MDBs and bilateral cooperation agencies.

1.9

Ex-post Project Evaluation. In addition to the SFP evaluation, individual
operations approved within the SFP will be evaluated according to the Bank’s
regulations for ex-post evaluation for SG operations.

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex V
Page 1 of 1

ANNEX V. PRELIMINARY BUDGETARY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PILOT PERIOD(1)

Labor inputs
Function

Cost (US$’000)
Admin Budget

Staff
(HC)(2)

Consultant
(FTE)

TC
2025-2030

Operational (structuring,
execution)

3 new , 2
reassigned

3 new

Credit Risk

1 part-time

Legal Support

(2025-2030)

Transact. Budget
(2026-2030)

2025-2027 BP

2028-2030
Estimate(3)

1,500

1,450

150/Y
200

200/Y

1 new

160

130

300

20

1 new

1 new

325

-

150/Y

40

Pricing/Finance

1 new

1 new

200

-

150/Y

-

ESG

1 new

-

600

-

150/Y

200

Integrity & Governance

-

1 new

200

-

120

-

Fiduciary

-

-

-

-

-

-

Source: Project Team estimates.
Notes:
(1) All amounts are indicative and subject to subsequent financial and budgetary discussions with the Board
(2) All reassigned staff are part-time, and inputs will vary over time, not allowing for a clear computation forecast at this stage
(3) Some of the costs are one-time expenditure, primarily non-labor expenses. Conversely, most of the labor costs will be recurrent, thus staff costs indicated are annual

IDB for Cities & Regions – Annex VI

ANNEX VI. * ***

Appendix 1

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__ /25

Sub-Sovereign Finance Program (SFP)

The Board of Executive Directors
RESOLVE:
1.
To approve the “Sub-Sovereign Finance Program (SFP)” on a pilot basis for a
period of five (5) years from the date of this Resolution, in accordance with the terms and
conditions set forth in sections IV and V of document ______.

2.
That up to the amount of US$1,000,000,000 from the Bank’s Ordinary Capital
resources will be allocated to the SFP for the purpose of financing investment loan and guarantee
operations under Subprogram 1 of the SFP.

(Adopted on ________ 2025)

